arXiv:2006.02506v3 [physics.ins-det] 28 Feb 2022

The LUX-ZEPLIN (LZ) radioactivity and cleanliness control
programs
D.S. Akeriba,b , C.W. Akerlofc , D. Yu. Akimovd , A. Alquahtanie , S.K. Alsumf ,
T.J. Andersona,b , N. Angelidesg , H.M. Araújoh , A. Arbucklef , J.E. Armstrongi ,
M. Arthursc , H. Auyeunga , S. Avilesj , X. Baij , A.J. Baileyh , J. Balajthyk ,
S. Balashovl , J. Bange , M.J. Barrym , D. Bauerh , P. Bauern , A. Baxtero , J. Bellep ,
P. Beltrameq , J. Bensingerr , T. Bensonf , E.P. Bernards,m , A. Bernsteint , A. Bhattii ,
A. Biekerts,m , T.P. Biesiadzinskia,b , H.J. Bircho , B. Birrittellaf , K.E. Boastu ,
A.I. Bolozdynyad , E.M. Boultonv,s , B. Boxero , R. Bramantea,b , S. Bransonf ,
P. Brásw , M. Breidenbacha , C.A.J. Brewl , J.H. Buckleyx , V.V. Bugaevx ,
R. Bunkerj , S. Burdino , J.K. Busenitzy , R. Cabritaw , J.S. Campbellf , C. Carelsu ,
D.L. Carlsmithf , B. Carlsonn , M.C. Carmona-Benitezz , M. Cascellag , C. Chane ,
J.J. Cherwinkaf , A.A. Chilleraa , C. Chilleraa , N.I. Chottj , A. Colem , J. Colemanm ,
D. Collingh , R.A. Conleya , A. Cottleu , R. Coughlenj , G. Coxz , W.W. Craddocka ,
D. Currann , A. Currieh , J.E. Cutterk , J.P. da Cunhaw , C.E. Dahlab,p , S. Dardinm ,
S. Dasuf , J. Davisn , T.J.R. Davisonq , L. de Viveirosz , N. Decheinef , A. Dobim ,
J.E.Y. Dobsong , E. Druszkiewiczac , A. Dushkinr , T.K. Edbergi , W.R. Edwardsm ,
B.N. Edwardsv , J. Edwardsf , M.M. Elnimry , W.T. Emmetv , S.R. Eriksenad ,
C.H. Fahamm , A. Fana,b , S. Fayerh , S. Fioruccim , H. Flaecherad ,
I.M. Fogarty Florangi , P. Fordl , V.B. Francisl , E.D. Frasero , F. Froborgh , T. Fruthg ,
R.J. Gaitskelle , N.J. Gantosm , D. Garciae , V.M. Gehmanm , R. Gelfandac ,
J. Genovesij , R.M. Gerhardk , C. Ghagg , E. Gibsonu , M.G.D. Gilchriesem ,
S. Gokhaleae , B. Gomberf , T.G. Gondaa , A. Greenallo , S. Greenwoodh ,
G. Gregersonf , M.G.D. van der Grintenl , C.B. Gwilliamo , C.R. Halli , D. Hamiltonf ,
S. Hansae , K. Hanzelm , T. Harringtonf , A. Harrisonj , J. Harrisonj , C. Hasselkusf ,
S.J. Haselschwardtaf , D. Hemerk , S.A. Hertelag , J. Heisef , S. Hillbrandk ,
O. Hitchcockf , C. Hjemfeltj , M.D. Hoffm , B. Holbrookk , E. Holtoml , J.Y-K. Hory ,
M. Hornn , D.Q. Huange , T.W. Hurteauv , C.M. Ignarraa,b , M.N. Irvingk ,
R.G. Jacobsens,m , O. Jahangirg , S.N. Jefferyl , W. Jia,b , M. Johnsonn , J. Johnsonk ,
P. Johnsonf , W.G. Jonesh , A.C. Kabothai,l , A. Kamahaah,∗, K. Kamdinm,s ,
V. Kaseyh , K. Kazkazt , J. Keefnern , D. Khaitanac , M. Khaleeqh , A. Khazovl ,
A.V. Khromovd , I. Khuranag , Y.D. Kimaj , W.T. Kimaj , C.D. Kochere , D. Kodroffz ,
A.M. Konovalovd , L. Korleyr , E.V. Korolkovaak , M. Koyuncuac , J. Krasf , H. Krausu ,
∗
∗∗

akamaha@albany.edu
umit.utku.12@ucl.ac.uk

S.W. Kravitzm , H.J. Krebsa , L. Kreczkoad , B. Kriklerad , V.A. Kudryavtsevak ,
A.V. Kumpand , S. Kyreaf , A.R. Lambertm , B. Landerudf , N.A. Larsenv ,
A. Laundrief , E.A. Leasonq , H.S. Leeaj , J. Leeaj , C. Leea,b , B.G. Lenardok ,
D.S. Leonardaj , R. Leonardj , K.T. Leskom , C. Levyah , J. Liaj , Y. Liuf , J. Liaoe ,
F.-T. Liaou , J. Lins,m , A. Lindotew , R. Linehana,b , W.H. Lippincottp , R. Liue ,
X. Liuq , C. Loniewskiac , M.I. Lopesw , E. Lopez-Asamarw , B. López Paredesh ,
W. Lorenzonc , D. Luceron , S. Luitza , J.M. Lylee , C. Lynche , P.A. Majewskil ,
J. Makkinjee , D.C. Mallinge , A. Manalaysayk , L. Manentig , R.L. Manninof ,
N. Marangouh , D.J. Markleyp , P. MarrLaundrief , T.J. Martinp , M.F. Marzioniq ,
C. Maupinn , C.T. McConnellm , D.N. McKinseys,m , J. McLaughlinab , D.-M. Meiaa ,
Y. Mengy , E.H. Millera,b , Z.J. Minakerk , E. Mizrachii , J. Mockah,m , D. Molashj ,
A. Montep , M.E. Monzania,b , J.A. Moradk , E. Morrisonj , B.J. Mountal ,
A.St.J. Murphyq , D. Naimk , A. Naylorak , C. Nedlikag , C. Nehrkornaf , H.N. Nelsonaf ,
J. Nesbitf , F. Nevesw , J.A. Nikkell , J.A. Nikoleyczikf , A. Nilimaq , J. O’Delll ,
H. Ohac , F.G. O’Neilla , K. O’Sullivanm,s , I. Olcinam,s , M.A. Olevitchx ,
K.C. Oliver-Mallorym,s , L. Oxboroughf , A. Pagacf , D. Pagenkopfaf , S. Palw ,
K.J. Palladinof , V.M. Palmaccioi , J. Palmerai , M. Pangilinane , N. Parveenah ,
S.J. Pattonm , E.K. Peasem , B.P. Penningr , G. Pereiraw , C. Pereiraw , I.B. Petersonm ,
A. Piepkey , S. Piersona , S. Powello , R.M. Preecel , K. Pushkinc , Y. Qieac ,
M. Racinea , B.N. Ratcliffa , J. Reichenbacherj , L. Reichhartg , C.A. Rhynee ,
A. Richardsh , Q. Riffards,m , G.R.C. Rischbieterah , J.P. Rodriguesw , H.J. Roseo ,
R. Roseroae , P. Rossiterak , R. Rucinskip , G. Rutherforde , J.S. Sabam , L. Sabarotsf ,
D. Santoneai , M. Sarychevp , A.B.M.R. Sazzady , R.W. Schneej , M. Schubnellc ,
P.R. Scovelll , M. Seversonf , D. Seymoure , S. Shawaf , G.W. Shutta , T.A. Shutta,b ,
J.J. Silki , C. Silvaw , K. Skarpaasa , W. Skulskiac , A.R. Smithm , R.J. Smiths,m ,
R.E. Smithf , J. Soj , M. Solmazaf , V.N. Solovovw , P. Sorensenm , V.V. Sosnovtsevd ,
I. Stancuy , M.R. Starkj , S. Stephensonk , N. Sterne , A. Stevensu , T.M. Stiegleram ,
K. Stiftera,b , R. Studleyr , T.J. Sumnerh , K. Sundarnathj , P. Sutcliffeo , N. Swansone ,
M. Szydagisah , M. Tanu , W.C. Taylore , R. Taylorh , D.J. Taylorn , D. Templesab ,
B.P. Tennysonv , P.A. Termanam , K.J. Thomasm , J.A. Thomsonk , D.R. Tiedti ,
M. Timalsinaj , W.H. Toa,b , A. Tomásh , T.E. Topep , M. Tripathik , D.R. Tronstadj ,
C.E. Tullm , W. Turnero , L. Tvrznikovav,s , M. Utesp , U. Utkug,∗∗, S. Uvarovk ,
J. Va’vraa , A. Vachereth , A. Vaitkuse , J.R. Verbuse , T. Vietanenf , E. Voirinp ,
C.O. Vuosalof , S. Walcottf , W.L. Waldronm , K. Walkerf , J.J. Wangr , R. Wangp ,
L. Wangaa , W. Wangag , Y. Wangac , J.R. Watsons,m , J. Migneaulte , S. Weatherlyi ,
R.C. Webbam , W.-Z. Weiaa , M. Whileaa , R.G. Whitea,b , J.T. Whiteam ,
D.T. Whiteaf , T.J. Whitisa,an , W.J. Wisniewskia , K. Wilsonm , M.S. Witherellm,s ,
F.L.H. Wolfsac , J.D. Wolfsac , D. Woodwardz , S.D. Worml , X. Xiange , Q. Xiaof ,
2

J. Xut , M. Yehae , J. Yinac , I. Youngp , C. Zhangaa , P. Zarzhitskyy
a

SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA 94025-7015, USA
Kavli Institute for Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
94305-4085 USA
c
University of Michigan, Randall Laboratory of Physics, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1040, USA
d
National Research Nuclear University MEPhI (NRNU MEPhI), Moscow, 115409, RUS
e
Brown University, Department of Physics, Providence, RI 02912-9037, USA
f
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Department of Physics, Madison, WI 53706-1390, USA
g
University College London (UCL), Department of Physics and Astronomy, London WC1E 6BT,
UK
h
Imperial College London, Physics Department, Blackett Laboratory, London SW7 2AZ, UK
i
University of Maryland, Department of Physics, College Park, MD 20742-4111, USA
j
South Dakota School of Mines and Technology, Rapid City, SD 57701-3901, USA
k
University of California, Davis, Department of Physics, Davis, CA 95616-5270, USA
l
STFC Rutherford Appleton Laboratory (RAL), Didcot, OX11 0QX, UK
m
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL), Berkeley, CA 94720-8099, USA
n
South Dakota Science and Technology Authority (SDSTA), Sanford Underground Research
Facility, Lead, SD 57754-1700, USA
o
University of Liverpool, Department of Physics, Liverpool L69 7ZE, UK
p
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (FNAL), Batavia, IL 60510-5011, USA
q
University of Edinburgh, SUPA, School of Physics and Astronomy, Edinburgh EH9 3FD, UK
r
Brandeis University, Department of Physics, Waltham, MA 02453, USA
s
University of California, Berkeley, Department of Physics, Berkeley, CA 94720-7300, USA
t
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), Livermore, CA 94550-9698, USA
u
University of Oxford, Department of Physics, Oxford OX1 3RH, UK
v
Yale University, Department of Physics, New Haven, CT 06511-8499, USA
w
Laboratório de Instrumentação e Fı́sica Experimental de Partı́culas (LIP), University of
Coimbra, P-3004 516 Coimbra, Portugal
x
Washington University in St. Louis, Department of Physics, St. Louis, MO 63130-4862, USA
y
University of Alabama, Department of Physics & Astronomy, Tuscaloosa, AL 34587-0324, USA
z
Pennsylvania State University, Department of Physics, University Park, PA 16802-6300, USA
aa
University of South Dakota, Department of Physics & Earth Sciences, Vermillion, SD
57069-2307, UK
ab
Northwestern University, Department of Physics & Astronomy, Evanston, IL 60208-3112, USA
ac
University of Rochester, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Rochester, NY 14627-0171,
USA
ad
University of Bristol, H.H. Wills Physics Laboratory, Bristol, BS8 1TL, UK
ae
Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL), Upton, NY 11973-5000, USA
af
University of California, Santa Barbara, Department of Physics, Santa Barbara, CA
93106-9530, USA
ag
University of Massachusetts, Department of Physics, Amherst, MA 01003-9337, USA
ah
University at Albany (SUNY), Department of Physics, Albany, NY 12222-1000, USA
ai
Royal Holloway, University of London, Department of Physics, Egham, TW20 0EX, UK
aj
IBS Center for Underground Physics (CUP), Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, KOR
ak
University of Sheffield, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Sheffield S3 7RH, UK
b

3

al

Black Hills State University, School of Natural Sciences, Spearfish, SD 57799-0002, USA
Texas A&M University, Department of Physics and Astronomy, College Station, TX
77843-4242, USA
an
Case Western Reserve University, Department of Physics, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
am

Abstract
LUX-ZEPLIN (LZ) is a second-generation direct dark matter experiment with spinindependent WIMP-nucleon scattering sensitivity above 1.4 × 10−48 cm2 for a WIMP
mass of 40 GeV/c2 and a 1000 d exposure. LZ achieves this sensitivity through a
combination of a large 5.6 t fiducial volume, active inner and outer veto systems, and
radio-pure construction using materials with inherently low radioactivity content.
The LZ collaboration performed an extensive radioassay campaign over a period of
six years to inform material selection for construction and provide an input to the
experimental background model against which any possible signal excess may be
evaluated. The campaign and its results are described in this paper.
We present assays of dust and radon daughters depositing on the surface of components as well as cleanliness controls necessary to maintain background expectations
through detector construction and assembly.
Finally, examples from the campaign to highlight fixed contaminant radioassays
for the LZ photomultiplier tubes, quality control and quality assurance procedures
through fabrication, radon emanation measurements of major sub-systems, and bespoke detector systems to assay scintillator are presented.
Keywords: Radio-purity, Gamma-ray spectroscopy, Mass spectrometry, Neutron
Activation, Alpha counting, Low background, Dark matter, LZ, Surface assay,
Radon emanation
1. Introduction
The LUX-ZEPLIN (LZ) experiment operates a 7 t purified liquid-xenon target
in a time projection chamber (TPC) and has a design sensitivity capable of excluding at 90% confidence level spin-independent WIMP-nucleon cross sections above
1.4 × 10−48 cm2 for a 40 GeV/c2 mass WIMP, providing excellent discovery potential for WIMPs through nucleon elastic scattering and subsequent detection of light
and charge from the collisions [1]. The detector is currently being installed in the
Davis Cavern of the Sanford Underground Research Facility (SURF) at a depth of
approximately 4850 ft which is equivalent to approximately 4300 meters of water
4

(henceforth referred to as meters of water equivalent - m w.e.). The detector is described in detail in [2] and [3]. The expected sensitivity of the experiment is achieved
through a combination of very low background rates, a large fiducial mass of 5.6 t,
and a 1000 d WIMP search exposure. The detector backgrounds are predominantly
of two kinds: electron recoils (ER) which occur through interaction with the atomic
electrons of the target xenon material; and nuclear recoils (NR) which occur through
interaction with the nucleus of the xenon. The coincident background levels in LZ
are suppressed, tagged and characterized by employing two veto detectors: an instrumented layer of liquid-xenon known as the xenon skin veto, and an outer detector
(OD) that uses a Gd-loaded liquid scintillator (GdLS) detection medium. The inner
5.6 t fiducial volume further benefits from attenuation of background radioactivity
penetrating the TPC.
The construction of LZ requires materials very low in radio-contamination to
limit their background contribution in the target, thus maximizing the rare-event
search sensitivity. Furthermore, an accurate knowledge of the expected low levels
of background from remaining radioactivity and irreducible sources is necessary to
ascribe confidence to any possible observation of signal excess. This article presents
the results from the radioassay and screening campaign performed to inform the
selection of LZ construction materials and to develop the experiment’s comprehensive
background model.
Section 2 describes the gamma-ray spectroscopy and mass spectrometry techniques and the facilities used to determine levels of radioactivity in the bulk of the
materials, including efforts to cross-calibrate the various detectors deployed. Section 3 presents the radon emanation facilities available to LZ which were used to
inform selection of materials in contact with liquid xenon and to characterize components used for the construction of the LZ experiment. Section 4 describes our
techniques to limit surface depositions of environmental dust and atmospheric radon
decay-progeny, with particular emphasis on the period of detector assembly at SURF.
Section 5 presents a selection of highlights from the assay program that illustrates
our fixed-contaminant radioassays for the LZ PMTs; demonstrates the importance
of our quality control (QC) and quality assurance (QA) procedures for construction
of the cryostat; revisits a dedicated detector constructed to survey the scintillator
for the OD first discussed in [4]; and presents radon emanation measurements from
key components, including in-situ assays of the cryostat with the complete detector
within.
Upon completion of any assay, results are uploaded to a dedicated database. This
database links assay results to individual components of the LZ detector, greatly
simplifying the process of building the expected background model which, in turn,
5

helps to define the expected sensitivity of the detector. The results from the assays
performed are tabulated in the Appendix to this article.
2. Fixed Contamination
2.1. Origin of Fixed Contamination
Fixed contaminants are embedded in materials and typically consist of naturally occurring radioactive materials (NORM), the most prevalent being 238 U, 235 U,
232
Th, and their progenies which emit various radioactive species through their decay
eventually to stable isotopes of lead; and gamma-ray emitting isotopes, 40 K, 60 Co
and 137 Cs. Neutrons are produced through (α,n) reactions and through spontaneous
fission in the uranium and thorium decay chains. The 238 U and 232 Th chains are
divided into ‘early’ and ‘late’; for 238 U, the early part of the chain (238 Ue ) contains
the isotopes above 226 Ra since chemical processes may induce a break of secular
equilibrium at this point, and it will take thousands of years (τ1/2 1600 years) to be
restored. The late part of the chain (238 Ul ) is counted from 226 Ra and below. Typical
p-type high-purity germanium (HPGe) detectors are not sensitive to the low-energy
gamma-ray lines from 210 Pb at the bottom of the chain but broad energy germanium
(BEGe), n-type and well-type detectors available to LZ are.
Secular equilibrium breaking is observed by differences in long-lived isotope concentrations in early and late chain values. However, it should be noted that the
232
Th chain, as defined, includes 228 Ra which has a relatively long half-life of 5.7 y.
If 232 Th and 228 Th are depleted in production of a material, it is possible for 228 Th
to grow back in from 228 Ra on a time scale of several years, such that assays may
underestimate the ultimate activity. It can be difficult to measure 228 Ra with the
same sensitivity as 232 Th because HPGe counting used for the former is generally less
sensitive than ICP-MS analysis used for the latter, particularly for samples where
only small masses are available, but the risk is generally mitigated by using materials
where batches of different ages have been measured over the course of a long material
selection campaign [5].
The collaboration also performs assays with in-house inductively-coupled plasma
mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) (Section 2.4) and some limited use of glow discharge
mass spectromety (GDMS).
2.2. High-Purity Germanium Screening
Gamma-ray spectroscopy was used to identify the bulk of the radio-isotopes contributing to neutron and gamma-ray emission. In order to achieve sensitivity to the
required low levels, these measurements were typically of 1 to 2 week duration. Assays were made using 12 HPGe detectors, or variants of HPGe detectors, available
6

to the LZ collaboration across four sites, described in the following subsections and
with key parameters summarized in Table 1 and performance characteristics summarized in Table 2. In the early stages of the LZ screening program, a campaign of
blind cross-calibration across all detectors was undertaken to verify the consistency
of analysis and interpretation across the different sites. The cross-calibration campaign is described in Section 2.3. HPGe assay sensitivity to both early and late chain
activities was critical to the comprehensive modeling of backgrounds.
2.2.1. BHUC
The Black Hills Underground Campus (BHUC) [6] is a facility located at the
4850 ft level of SURF which hosts a class 2000 cleanroom containing six low- and
ultra-low background HPGe detectors: Maeve, Morgan, Mordred, SOLO, and
the TWINS. Maeve, an Ortec 85% relative efficiency p-type detector (where the
efficiency is defined as relative to that of a 3-inch × 3-inch NaI detector exposed to
1332 keV 60 Co gamma-rays with a source-detector distance of 25 cm) was previously
situated in the Davis campus at SURF and, before that, at LBNL’s Oroville site for
15 years. Morgan, an Ortec 85% relative efficiency p-type detector, is effectively
identical to Maeve in performance. Mordred, an Ortec 60% relative efficiency
n-type detector, was retrofitted with ultra-low background electronics to improve
its performance for low-background assay. Mordred has good sensitivity to lowenergy gamma rays and is therefore particularly well-suited for U early chain assays.
SOLO, a 30% relative efficiency p-type detector, was previously sited in the Soudan
Underground Laboratory and played an important role in the LUX experiment’s
material assay campaign [7, 8, 9]. While the crystal is small, it has exceptionally
low backgrounds. The newest detectors in the BHUC are referred to as the TWINS,
a pair of Ortec 90% relative efficiency p-type detectors in a common shield. The
TWINS can operate in coincidence or anti-coincidence and in combined singles data
acquisition mode where spectra from each detector are combined without any regard
for events which are detected in coincidence.
In the BHUC, Maeve, Morgan, Mordred, and SOLO are situated in separate
graded shields. The TWINS are installed in a common shield. Each shield provides at
least 20 cm of low-activity lead shielding with 2.5 cm of oxygen-free, low conductivity
copper within the lead. The shield surrounding Maeve has an inner layer of 2.5 cm
of ultra-low activity lead and the shield surrounding SOLO has an inner layer of 5 cm
of ancient lead. The study of low-background lead for detector shielding is discussed
in detail in [10]. All HPGe detectors are constructed using low-background designs
and include remote preamplifiers. All detectors are cooled using liquid nitrogen from
a fully automated filling system. The background radon in the BHUC counting
7

room varies between 500-1000 Bq/kg. In order to suppress the background in the
detectors caused by radon, a dedicated gas generator was installed which produces
low activity nitrogen gas from a liquid nitrogen dewar at a rate of approximately 1.4
litres per minute. The gas purge flushes the detector counting cavities as well as the
lead and copper shields. An additional detector, Ge-IV, operated by the University
of Alabama, is installed outside the cleanroom, although this has not been used for
assays discussed in this paper.
2.2.2. BUGS
The Boulby Underground Germanium Suite (BUGS) hosts seven gamma spectroscopy detectors 1.1 km underground at the Boulby Underground Laboratory in
a class 1000 cleanroom. Since 2013, the majority of screening efforts for the LZ
experiment were performed using the Chaloner, Lunehead, and Lumpsey detectors.
These detectors are, respectively, a Mirion (formerly Canberra) BE5030 broad-energy
ultra-low background (ULB) HPGe detector1 , a Mirion ULB SAGe well-detector, and
a refurbished 100% relative efficiency Ortec p-type detector used previously for the
ZEPLIN–II and ZEPLIN–III experiment’s low background counting [11, 12, 13]. The
BUGS detectors are housed in custom shields designed and built by Lead Shield Engineering Ltd. The shields comprise 9 cm thickness of lead and an inner layer of 9 cm
thickness of copper with interlocking retractable roofs to simplify sample loading.
The lead used in these shields has mostly been recycled from lead used to shield previous low-background experiments hosted at the Boulby Underground Laboratory.
The characterizations and sensitivities of these detectors are discussed in [5].
In addition to these detectors, BUGS has installed additional Mirion “specialty
ultra-low background” (S-ULB) detectors which have been used to screen later LZ
samples since 2017. These comprise two p-type detectors, Belmont and Merrybent,
with relative efficiencies of 160% and 100%, respectively, and Roseberry, a BE6530
BEGe type detector. For uniformity, these detectors are housed in similar shields to
those used for the ULB standard Mirion detectors with the exception of the shield
used for the Belmont detector which includes an inner liner of very low-background
copper. These three detectors display substantially lower backgrounds than those of
the ULB standard to significantly enhance the throughput rate of assays for LZ. The
Belmont detector in particular, was used to further lower the 238 Ul upper limits for
1

It is inappropriate to classify BEGe and SAGe well detectors by their relative efficiency as they
are designed to maximize efficiency to low-energy gamma-rays rather than to maximize efficiency
to a 1332 keV 60 Co gamma-ray. For the BEGe type detector, the model number signifies the area of
the front face and the thickness of the crystal. In the case of the BE5030 detector, it has a 50 cm2
front face and a thickness of 30 mm.

8

titanium reported in [14].
The shields used for all detectors are purged using nitrogen from a Wirac NG6
gas generator. The Boulby Underground Laboratory benefits from a low baseline
radon level (averaging ∼2.5 Bq/m3 ). To remove residual radon in the nitrogen purge
gas, charcoal traps containing approximately 6 kg of Carboact activated charcoal are
deployed in a Labcold ULTF416 −80 ◦ C chest freezer. This radon reduction system
is based on the design of a radon emanation detector developed at the Centre de
Physique des Particules de Marseille (CPPM) [15]. As an example, the use of this
purge system reduces the count rate in the 609 keV line by at least a factor of 40
(from 16.4 counts/kg/day to less than 0.4 counts/kg/day at 90% confidence level).
2.2.3. LBNL
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) has two HPGe detectors devoted
to assay [16]. These are housed in a near-surface room shielded with over 1.5 m of
low radioactivity concrete. The Merlin detector is an Ortec 115% n-type detector.
Merlin is shielded by 20 cm of lead with an inner layer of 2.5 cm of copper and is
equipped with a plastic scintillator cosmic-ray veto. The BIG-8 detector is an 85%
p-type detector shielded with 10 cm of lead and 1.2 cm of copper. It is equipped with
a NaI veto that encloses the Ge crystal. Both detectors are flushed with nitrogen
boil-off gas. The cosmic-ray vetos and local shielding result in detector performance
equivalent to being sited at a depth of approximately 500 m w.e.
2.2.4. Alabama
The University of Alabama operates two above-ground Canberra p-type lowbackground HPGe detectors [17]. These are Ge-II and Ge-III which have relative
efficiencies of 60% and 105%, respectively. Each of these detectors is housed in
shielding comprising 20 cm of lead with an inner layer of 5 cm of copper, instrumented
with 5 cm thick plastic scintillator cosmic-ray veto detectors. The sample chambers
are continuously flushed with nitrogen boil-off gas to displace radon. Despite their
above-ground location, the background rates achieved this way are comparable to
some of the underground devices, as reported in Table 2. Ge-II and Ge-III have
been used for items assayed using Neutron Activation Analysis (NAA), described
in Section 2.5. Ge-III was further utilized extensively for studies of 210 Pb surface
activities, their deposition through radon exposure, and their removal.
2.3. HPGe Cross-Calibration
Early in the LZ assay efforts, it was recognized that samples would be distributed
amongst a large variety of detectors with different backgrounds, shielding arrangements, and histories. To cross-calibrate and evaluate the systematic uncertainties in
9

Table 1: Key characteristics of the 12 detectors used in the LZ HPGe screening campaign. Crystal
mass and volume is included to give an idea of the relative sizes of the crystal. In addition the
relative efficiency is given for the p-type detectors and the area of the front face is given for the
BEGe detectors.

Location Detector

BUGS

LBNL
BHUC

Alabama

Relative Face
V
M
Efficiency Area
[cm3 ] [kg]
(%)
[cm2 ]

Type

Belmont
p-type
Merrybent p-type
Lunehead p-type
Roseberry BEGe
Chaloner BEGe
Lumpsey SAGe well
Merlin
n-type
Maeve
p-type
Morgan p-type
Mordred n-type
SOLO
p-type
Ge-II
p-type
Ge-III
p-type

10

600
375
375
195
150
263
430
375
375
253
113
260
406

3.2
2.0
2.0
1.0
0.8
1.4
2.2
2.0
2.0
1.3
0.6
1.4
2.2

160
100
100
115
85
85
60
30
60
105

65
50
-

Table 2: Performance characteristics for each detector used in the LZ fixed contaminant screening
campaign. For each detector, as is standard, the full-width at half maximum (FWHM) of the
1332 keV 60 Co gamma-ray is shown. It can be seen that BEGe and SAGe-well type detectors
(Roseberry, Chaloner & Lumpsey) typically achieve the best resolution. A comparison of the
integral counts between 60-2700 keV is given scaled to the mass of the detector crystal. Finally, a
comparison between count rates for several peaks of interest are given corresponding to standard
NORM (or in the case of 60 Co, anthropogenic) isotopes. The gaps in this table reflect the absence of
a measurable peak for the given energy either because of a lack of sensitivity (in the case of 46.5 keV
for p-type detectors) or due to very low background levels. The Merlin detector is dedicated to prescreening NORM contamination in advance of samples being shipped to be assayed using a BHUC
detector. This being the case, 60 Co levels are not routinely quoted and, therefore, a background
level does not appear in this table.
Detector

Belmont
Merrybent
Lunehead
Roseberry
Chaloner
Lumpsey
Merlin
Maeve
Morgan
Mordred
SOLO
Ge-II
Ge-III

208
214
60
40
210
FWHM Integral (60 Tl
Bi
Co
K
Pb
1332 keV 2700) keV
2614.5 keV 609.3 keV 1332.5 keV 1460.8 keV 46.5 keV
[keV]
[kg−1 ·day−1 ] [kg−1 ·day−1 ] [kg−1 ·day−1 ] [kg−1 ·day−1 ] [kg−1 ·day−1 ] [kg−1 ·day−1 ]

1.92
1.87
1.86
1.58
1.56
1.66
3.59
3.19
2.68
2.44
5.52
3.6
2.71

135.0
167.4
582.4
181.1
1053.0
4256.8
68868.3
956.1
1338.8
2103.2
786.9
9600
8600

0.3
0.4
2.0
1.7
12.2
9.7
1.8
3.2
2.1
-

1.4
1.8
4.7
9.5
60.3
7.5
1.4
8.8
3.9
3.3
3.6
9.6

11

1.6
0.6
1.5
0.6
1.2
1.6
0.5
3.8
1.6
10.3
1.7

1.0
1.9
9.2
0.7
8.3
7.0
20.0
3.5
4.8
7.4
2.3
2.5

0.3
1.7
13.7
80.2
49.6
4.6
29.0
1.6

assays performed with a number of the detectors listed in Table 2, a sample of latite
with well-characterized uranium, thorium and potassium content was prepared. This
material has been used by LBNL for more than 30 years to characterize its detectors.
The uniformity of the radioactivity has been studied and is confirmed to be flat across
a variety of sample sizes from ∼1 mm up to several cm. An S5 Marinelli beaker of
this mineral was prepared and sealed. The content and activity was not known by
the rest of the collaboration and the same beaker was subsequently analyzed by all
groups on all their detectors. The analyses were sent to a central site, amassed and
compared by one individual who had knowledge of the true contamination of the
calibration source material.
This comparison uncovered some issues with several analyses, mostly due to problems with the Monte Carlo simulations of the detectors. After discrepancies were
highlighted by the individual who amassed the results, these issues were identified
and corrected. The results were again compared across all the detectors. Table 3 lists
reference values for each isotope; compares results from each detector; and gives their
combined average and standard deviation. A visual comparison between detectors
used in the calibration program for potassium is shown in Figure 1. It is important
to note at this point that when a concentration is reported, in parts per value e.g.
ppm, ppb, ppt (g of U/Th per g of material), it is no longer pertinent to refer to
late chain or early chain values as the concentration defines the concentration of the
progenitor isotope (238 U , 235 U, 232 Th) assuming secular equilibrium [18]. There is
some residual disagreement between Ge-II, Ge-III and the other detectors. These
two surface detectors were used primarily for neutron activation analysis and prescreening of samples before sending them for assay on an underground detector. We
noted the discrepancies but because of their limited use, we chose to accept this in a
larger systematic for these two detectors. The vast majority of the assays performed
as part of the LZ campaign were carried out on the detectors shown in Figure 1. The
cross-calibration effort confirmed that the modeling of detector geometries and efficiencies were correctly handled and provides a reasonable estimate on the systematic
variation among the assays of ∼10% thus giving the collaboration confidence that
each individual facility is able to produce consistent and accurate assay results. This
being the case, newer detectors that were used later in the campaign (such as the SULB detectors added to BUGS) were not required to be characterized using the latite
sample. Each facility was able to implement their own calibration and characterization methods and the subsequent assay results were accepted to be accurate within
statistical errors and within the systematic errors of the detector used. Agreement
between the detectors used in the cross-calibration campaign and newer detectors
was also informally verified by assaying identical samples on different detectors.
12

Table 3: Results from the HPGe cross-calibration performed using a sample of latite. For the 238 Ue
and 238 Ul columns, the contamination reported is that of the progenitor isotope 238 U assuming
secular equilibrium and for the 232 The and 232 Thl columns, the contamination reported is that of
232
Th assuming secular equilibrium.

Detector
Reference
Merlin
Maeve
Mordred
SOLO
Chaloner
Lunehead
Ge-II
Ge-III
Average
Std. Dev.

238

Ue (ppm) 238 Ul (ppm) 232 The (ppm) 232 Thl (ppm) K (%)
8.5(1)
8.6(1)
10.2(1)
7.9(2)
11.4(15)
10.3(10)
9.2(2)
1.26

8.87(4)
8.92(9)
8.6(1)
7.92(5)
6.16(1)
8.73(5)
8.5(1)
9.6(13)
9.2(9)
7.61(3)
0.98

12.1(1)
12.4(1)
11.9(1)
11.3(1)
9.94(1)
11.1(1)
11.8(1)
12.2(17)
12.8(13)
10.54(5)
0.84

12.1(1)
12.4(1)
11.9(1)
11.3(2)
12.5(7)
11.1(1)
11.8(1)
12(16)
12.1(12)
11.9(1)
0.46

2.82(1)
2.81(3)
2.74(3)
2.66(6)
2.91(1)
2.81(1)
2.85(1)
3.4(4)
3.3(3)
2.84(2)
0.25

For some materials, such as the titanium, additional steps were taken to increase
our confidence in the assay precision. These included assaying the same sample in
multiple locations and at different times (to allow for the decay of cosmogenically
activated isotopes of scandium) and assaying samples using mass spectrometry. This
cross-calibration also verified that all counters had effective Rn-reducing purge systems. Periodically, the LZ assay campaign screening of selected samples was repeated
on different detectors to monitor for stability of assays. These ongoing comparisons
spanned a variety of source materials and a wide range of contamination levels, while
also probing for Th in-growth in particular LZ components. For many materials we
complemented the HPGe assays with Inductively-Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS) and, after their installation at Boulby, with the new S-ULB detectors
to further verify our measured concentrations of 238 Ue and 232 The .
Results from the assays deploying gamma spectroscopy are presented in Table A1.
2.4. Mass Spectrometry
Inductively-Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS) allows very precise
direct measurement of the elemental abundances of uranium and thorium in small
13

Potassium Content [%]

Reference
SOLO
Ge-III

MERLIN
Chaloner
Average ± SD

MAEVE
Lunehead

MORDRED
Ge-II

4

3.5

3

2.5

2

Figure 1: Cross-calibration results for potassium concentration for the detectors used in the LZ
HPGe radioassay campaign. The reference value for potassium concentration in this sample is
(2.82 ± 0.01)%. Excluding this, an error-weighted mean of (2.84 ± 0.02)% was derived from the
measurements of 40 K. In this figure, the gray band represents the standard deviation of the measurements with a value of 0.25%.

14

samples. The assays can be very quick, taking hours to days depending on requisite
sensitivity down to sub-ppt levels and depending on related sample preparation protocols. ICP-MS has been used extensively in LZ to quickly measure 238 U and 232 Th
in small samples to either reject or clear materials for use, or to pre-screen materials
prior to assay with gamma spectroscopy which can determine the complete activity through the 238 U and 232 Th decay chains. The speed of ICP-MS allowed rapid
analysis of test pieces provided by manufacturers at specified points in the production processes to detect potential issues and to ensure radioactivity and cleanliness
compliance. The manufacture of the Ti cryostat is one such example, highlighted in
Section 5.2.
The majority of ICP-MS assays for LZ were performed using a dedicated mass
spectrometry laboratory at UCL, housed in a class 1000 cleanroom facility and operating an Agilent 7900 spectrometer installed in 2015 exclusively for LZ [19]. Sample
preparation and analysis procedures have been developed for materials with U/Th
concentrations in the ppt to 1 ppb range: Samples are microwave-digested in precleaned modified-PTFE vessels using ultra-high purity acids. They are then diluted,
without further chemical treatment, into disposable 50 mL polypropylene (PP) vessels ready for ICP-MS analysis. Fractional recoveries of 230 Th and 233 U spikes added
prior to digestion are used to correct for 232 Th and 238 U signal loss from a range
of sources. In particular, this enables accurate analysis of samples with high total
dissolved solids (TDS) where the instrument response degrades throughout the run.
A full assay including digestion, ICP-MS measurement and analysis can be completed in a single day. The UCL facility was upgraded in 2019 with an Agilent 8900
ICP-MS.
In addition to the ICP-MS system at UCL, some material samples were assayed
using facilities at the University of Alabama, the Centre for Underground Physics
in Korea, and the Black Hills State University. At the University of Alabama, the
LZ group set up a sample preparation laboratory in a class 500 cleanroom equipped
with a cryogenic mill, microwave digestion system, and digestion bomb. Further
processing of samples, including spiking and resin-based extraction of U/Th isotopes
was carried out in a separate cleanroom. The samples were then given to the Department of Geological Sciences which processed the samples using a Perkin-Elmer
SCIEX-ELAN 6000 system. In Korea and at Black Hills State University, samples
were measured using Agilent 7900 spectrometer, as was used at UCL. Results from
ICP-MS assays for LZ are presented in Table A2.
Finally, in the early days of the LZ assay program, a small number of items
were assayed using Glow Discharge Mass Spectrometry (GDMS). These assays were
performed using a Thermo-Fisher VG 9000 GDMS instrument operated by the Na15

tional Research Council of Canada (NRC). GDMS can achieve sensitivities of around
10 ppt for conductive materials. For this reason, GDMS was used for some assays of
titanium. Results from the GDMS assays for LZ are presented in Table A3.
2.5. Neutron activation Analysis (NAA)
As with ICP-MS, NAA allows sensitive analysis of small concentrations of Th
and U in small samples. It only constrains the early decay series. It can be utilized
for materials where the matrix does not form long-lived radioactivity after neutron
capture. As such, it is well-suited for plastics.
For NAA assay in LZ, the University of Alabama group utilizes the 6 MWth
tank-type MIT Reactor II (MITR-II, located at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology) to activate samples. This technique is typically used for small size samples
of a few mm in diameter and several cm in length. LZ samples were prepared at
the University of Alabama in a cleanroom prior to their shipping to the reactor
for activation. Surfaces were leached extensively in high-grade acids to distinguish
bulk from surface activities. The polyethylene vials used for irradiation are cleaned,
welded shut, and leak tested. Samples are typically irradiated for 10 h in the highflux sample insertion facility of MITR-II before being returned for counting analysis.
Storage within sealed polyethylene vials serves to protect the samples from crosscontamination during transport and activation. There is a typical delay of around
24 h between activation being completed and samples being assayed using Ge-II or
Ge-III, but this is acceptable when compared to the half-lives of the activation products used for NAA (e.g. 42 K - τ1/2 = 22.3 h, 233 Pa - τ1/2 = 26.97 days, and 239 Np τ1/2 = 2.36 days). Assays typically lasted 2 to 4 weeks and a double-differential timeenergy analysis is used to determine elemental concentrations of samples. Neutron
capture cross sections, averaged over the energy distributions of the three reactor
neutron flux components, taken from the JENDL4.0 database are utilized in the
data analysis. For each of the LZ activation campaigns the neutron fluxes were determined by activating the NIST reference material, fly ash, immediately following
the sample. This allows to reference the elements of interest directly to a standard.
This method is discussed in depth in [20].
The techniques employed by the University of Alabama group routinely achieve
a sensitivity of 10−12 g U/Th per g of material and, indeed, sensitivities as good as
10−14 g of U/Th per g of material have been reported by the same group for assays
related to the EXO-200 experiment [20, 21]. Such sensitivity has been key for assays
and selection of raw materials not readily amenable to direct HPGe due to sample
mass or minimal detectable activity requirements, or to ICP-MS due to difficulties in
sample digestion and preparation. Selection of PTFE to manufacture the LZ TPC
16

reflectors are one such example where NAA has been deployed, with results presented
in Table A4.
3. Radon Emanation
3.1. Origin of Radon Emanation
All isotopes of radon are radioactive and only five are naturally found in minute
quantities in nature. Those of interest for the LZ background model and often other
experiments in search for WIMP dark matter are 222 Rn (τ1/2 = 3.82 d) from the 238 U
decay chain and 220 Rn (τ1/2 = 55.8 s) from the 232 Th decay chain; hereafter called
radon and thoron, respectively. Due to the long lifetime of their progenitor isotopes,
radon and thoron are produced at a near-constant rate within detector material over
the lifetime of an experiment. The emanation rate of a material can be broken
down into two parts: emanation due to recoiling radon atoms and emanation due
to diffusion. Emanation due to diffusion can vary drastically depending on chemical
and lattice structures of a material, density, surface roughness, and temperature.
The diffusion
length, L(m), of radon for a given material can be represented as
p
L(m) = D/λ, where D is the diffusion coefficient and λ the decay constant.
The background from radon emanation in LZ is dominated by the ground-state
to ground-state or “naked” β-emission from the 214 Pb progeny of the 222 Rn sub-chain
as it decays to 214 Bi. The relatively long half-life of 222 Rn leads to a homogeneous
mixing within the target volume, resulting in a uniform ER background with a βspectrum up to 1019 keV. The background from 220 Rn is expected to be significantly
suppressed due a much smaller diffusion length as a result of its shorter half-life,
hence most of it is expected to decay within the material volume in comparison to
222
Rn before diffusing out, or before maximally mixing with the active xenon volume.
Radon emanation accounts for ≈66% of the projected ER background in the
WIMP search region of interest in LZ [1], predominantly from a projected 222 Rn
specific activity of 2 µBq/kg that corresponds to approximately 20 mBq in the 10
tonnes of xenon, from which 11 mBq is in the fiducial volume. As demonstrated by
previous LXe-based rare-event search experiments, including LUX and ZEPLIN–III,
the amount of radon in the target can be deduced through analysis of the 214 Pb
β-spectrum and from coincidence tagging of decaying radon daughter 214 Bi and
214
Po [7, 12]. While such in-situ techniques are powerful in constraining the observed radon emanation background once the detector is closed and operational, a
screening campaign akin to that for fixed contaminants is required to inform material selection for detector and sub-system construction, and for the experiment
background prediction.
17

3.2. Radon Emanation Screening
3.2.1. Screening Techniques
Radon screening typically involves reconstructing the radon emanation rate by
measuring the radon sub-chain daughter isotopes. An approximate way of achieving
this uses gamma spectroscopy to measure the 214 Bi (τ1/2 = 19.9 min) and 214 Pb
(τ1/2 = 26.8 min) decay rates, from which the radon activity is inferred. Although
this method provides useful limits for emanation rates, it is extremely difficult to
distinguish radon daughters decaying in the bulk of the material to those that decay
outside. Thus, a precise emanation rate cannot be deduced without a materialspecific diffusion model.
A more direct and precise approach, one that has been utilised in four of the
LZ facilities, is to directly measure the activity of radon that has emanated out
from the material. The sample material is initially enclosed in an air-tight chamber
that is filled with a low-radon carrier gas, typically helium or nitrogen. This carrier
gas prevents recoiling radon atoms from embedding into the chamber walls.After an
emanation period that allows the radon concentration in the chamber to approach
equilibrium (∼1 week), the emanated radon atoms are transferred into a detector
that measures the rate of 218 Po (τ1/2 = 3.1 m) and 214 Po (τ1/2 = 164 µs), with a mean
decay time of ∼71 min after the initial 222 Rn decay. A second approach of measuring
the emanation rate is by identifying the delayed 214 BiPo coincidence. In both cases,
the radon emanation rate is reconstructed by correcting for the detection and transfer
efficiencies, measured during dedicated calibration runs with radon sources of known
activity.
The first of these reconstruction techniques determines the radon emanation rate
by detecting the α-particles emitted from the 218 Po and 214 Po isotopes. These systems use electrostatic silicon PIN-diodes to attract and capture the predominantly
positively charged ions (87.3 ± 1.6)% of radon daughter nuclei by using an electric
field that is generated from the negative voltage applied on the PIN-diode [22]. The
α-particles emitted from the 218 Po and 214 Po ions are detected by a PIN-diode as
they undergo α-decay and are distinguished by the energies they deposit; 6.1 MeV
and 7.9 MeV, respectively. Of the four radon-emanation screening facilities used by
LZ, three use electrostatic PIN-diode detectors for radon emanation. The fourth
facility collects the harvested radon by dissolving it in organic liquid scintillator by
means of a carrier gas. The delayed 214 Bi-214 Po coincidences are then counted to
infer the corresponding 222 Rn decay rate. All facilities operate at room temperature
such that the expected suppression of diffusion-dominated radon emanation at low
temperature is not probed.
The LZ collaboration performed cross-calibrations for the four radon facilities
18

Table 4: Comparison of the key highlights of the four radon emanation facilities used by LZ. The
chambers detailed are those used in containing the sample material, where radon is collected. Some
facilities operate two chambers as detailed below. Chamber blank rates detail the emanation rate
from the chambers alone and are background subtracted for sample measurements. Detector efficiency represents the fraction of activity measured from the total radon inside the detecting volume;
independent of chamber usage and transfer efficiency. The cross-calibration figures represent the
reconstructed emanation rate of a standard rubber sample previously used by other collaborations.
When not stated, overall uncertainties are estimated to be 10-20%.
Detector

Type

Chamber Volumes Chamber Blank Rates Transfer Efficiency Detector Efficiency
Cross-Calibration
[L]
[mBq]
[%]
[%]
[Measured/EXO–activity]

SDSM&T

PIN-diode

13
300

0.2
0.2

94
80

Maryland

PIN-diode

4.7

0.2

UCL

PIN-diode

2.6
2.6

0.2
0.4

Alabama

Liquid Scint.

2.6
2.6

<0.4

25

0.89±0.15
1.11±0.28

96

24

1.13 ± 0.19

97
97

30

1.49±0.15

34

36

0.83±0.17

deployed as part of our assay program. A rubber sample previously screened by the
EXO collaboration [23, 24] was assayed at each of the radon emanation facilities.
Prior to the emanation period, the sample was prepared under the same conditions
to reduce the chances of environmental contamination. The surface of the sample
was scrubbed with isopropyl alcohol-soaked lint-free wipes and inspected with UVlight to ensure no presence of surface contamination. The activity of the sample was
O(10 mBq) and was thus well above the minimal detectable activities of the radon
systems. Table 4 presents the results of the cross-calibration and a summary of key
details of the LZ radon screening facilities.
LZ makes use of two portable radon collection systems for equipment that is too
large or delicate to move to the radon emanation facilities or for assays of systems
under construction in the SURF Surface Assembly Laboratory (SAL). Emanated
radon is transferred to a cold trap consisting of copper beads or wool that is doublesealed and then transported by car or overnight shipping to the radon facility at South
Dakota School of Mines and Technology (SDSM&T) or University of Maryland. The
collected radon would then be transferred over into the respective radon detector with
transfer efficiencies taken into account from portable-system specific calibrations.
The activity is then reconstructed by correcting for the transportation time and
detector efficiency. These portable systems were critical for measurements of radon
emanation from the assembled LZ detector and from large instrumentation used in
the circulation path. Results from the radon emanation assay campaign are presented
in Table A5. For majority of the measurements, smaller samples are sent to the
facilities detailed below and radon is often collected in emanation chambers and

19

measured with their respective detectors.
3.2.2. SDSM&T
The SDSM&T system uses two electropolished stainless steel chambers as the
radon collection media: a 13 L vessel for smaller components and a 300 L vessel for
larger components. Emanation samples are placed in the chambers with care taken
not to introduce dust into the chambers or onto the samples. The chambers are then
filled with nitrogen gas that has been scrubbed of radon by an activated charcoal
trap cooled to 196 K by a mixture of dry ice and isopropyl alcohol.
After the sample has emanated, the radon is concentrated and transferred to the
1.7 L detection chamber in a multi-stage process. In the first stage, the radon is
transferred from the emanation chamber to a large brass wool trap cooled to 77 K
by liquid nitrogen (LN2 ). A high transfer efficiency is achieved even for the 300 L
vessel by repeatedly pumping the chamber out through the trap and refilling. The
radon is then transferred to a small brass wool trap by warming the large trap and
cooling the small trap and flowing clean nitrogen through first the large trap and
then the small trap. Due to the volume of gas allowed to flow, the transfer efficiency
from the large trap to the small trap is ≈100%. Then with the small trap and
detection chamber at low pressure, the small trap is warmed and nitrogen is allowed
to flow through the small trap into the detection chamber to raise the pressure in
the detection chamber to 100 Torr. This process transfers ∼95% of the radon to the
detection chamber, for overall transfer efficiencies of 80% (94%) for the 300 L (13 L)
chamber. The detector is an electrostatic silicon PIN-diode detector as described
above. The detector efficiency was determined to be 23 ± 2 % for 218 Po and 25 ± 2 %
for 214 Po under standard operating conditions. A system for performing emanations
at LN temperatures is under construction.
3.2.3. University of Maryland
The Maryland system’s primary focus was to measure emanation rates from volumes that act as their own emanation chambers, such as the LZ compressor system.
The Maryland system also contains a 4.6 L stainless steel vessel, used to calibrate
the system and to perform measurements on smaller samples. The system uses an
activated charcoal trap operated at LN2 temperature to initially scrub the radon
from the helium carrier gas. The radon from the emanation volume is captured by
a copper pellet trap also cooled to LN2 temperature. The copper trap is a 0.5”
electropolished stainless steel tube bent into a U-shape and containing 180 g of copper pellets (Atlantic Equipment Engineers CU-131). The pellets range in size from
1/16” to 3/32”. The radon is released from the copper at room temperature and
transferred to a 1.7 L chamber containing an electrostatic PIN diode detector. The
20

efficiency of the copper pellet trap was determined to be near 100% by repeated
trapping and counting of a radon sample. The absolute efficiency of the detector
was determined to be 24% by measuring a calibrated natural rock source purchased
from Durridge. Ion drift simulations were carried out to study the performance of
the detector. The predicted efficiency agrees with the measurements within the systematic uncertainty for both the Maryland and the SDSM&T detection chambers,
which have a near-identical design.
A second electrostatic PIN diode radon counting system is operated at Maryland
in flow-through mode to measure the elution curves of charcoal samples in helium
carrier gas. A piece of uranium ore acts as an uncalibrated radon source for these
measurements. Once the elution curve is determined, an appropriate radon harvesting time can be chosen for each charcoal sample during its subsequent radon
emanation measurement.
3.2.4. UCL
The UCL system’s custom-made electrostatic detector was originally developed
for high sensitivity radon measurements for the ELEGANT V and Super-Kamiokande
experiments [25]. The detector consists of a 70 L electropolished steel chamber with
a silicon PIN-diode located at the top, operating under the same principles as described above. By the use of a calibration source of known activity (a 1.32 kBq “flowthrough” 226 Ra source by Pylon Electronics, RN-1025), the detection efficiencies for
214
Po and 218 Po are determined to be (31.6 ± 1.6)% and (27.1 ± 1.4)%, respectively,
with helium as the transfer gas. The system operates two 2.7 L stainless steel chambers as the emanation media. The larger detector volume and the small emanation
volumes allow a single step transfer process, where helium gas is flushed through the
emanation chambers, directly into the detector. To eliminate the contamination of
background radon from the carrier gas, the gas is initially allowed to flow through
an activated carbon trap stored in an ultra-low temperate freezer (193 K) and the
entire system is purged to remove accumulated radon emanating out of the transfer
lines.
A second mode of operation for the system uses 57 g of activated carbon (a
synthetic charcoal sourced from Carbo-Act International [26]) as a radon collection
trap. In larger emanation volumes, the radon is initially absorbed into the cooled
trap while the carrier gas passes through. The trap is then heated to release the
radon and the carrier gas is then used to transfer the concentrated radon into the
detector volume. The trapping efficiency for this setup has been measured to be
≈93% at 248 K. The cold trap was not generally necessary for the results reported
in Table A5.
21

A second facility with sensitivity to low-temperature emanation is under construction and will be operated at the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory.
3.2.5. University of Alabama
The radon emanation facility at Alabama operates in a similar principle to those
of the other three detectors, with the exception of their detection technique. Two
2.6 L electropolished emanation chambers, of the same design as those utilized by the
UCL group, are used to accumulate the radon outgassed from samples of interest.
Boil-off nitrogen, selected for its low intrinsic radon content, serves as a carrier to
transfer the radon into about 150 mL of organic liquid scintillator. The carrier gas
is flowed for 48 min at a rate of 20 mL/min. Experiments with a calibrated Pylon
RN-1025 radon source showed that longer purge times and higher flow rates result in
more effective radon removal from the collection vessel but, on the other hand, lead
to radon loss in the liquid scintillator due to the dissolved radon being washed out.
The chosen parameters constitute the optimal compromise between these two mechanisms. Measurements with cascaded scintillator collectors showed that under these
conditions about 70% of the radon arriving at the scintillator-gas interface dissolves
in the scintillator. Use of the calibrated radon source yields an overall radon transfer
efficiency of 34.3%. The radon-loaded scintillator is transferred into a small acrylic
counting cell, equipped with one low-activity 76 mm (3 inch) Hamamatsu R-1307
PMT. The measurement of delayed 214 Bi-214 Po coincidences allows the determination of the decay rate with low background. The analysis of the delayed-coincidence
data sets uses cuts on the β- and α-like energy deposits. The distribution of time
differences between β- and α-like events is fit to an exponential plus a constant, with
the correlation time frozen to the known 214 Po mean lifetime. The exponential component of the fit determines the decay rate; the constant term unfolds the random
background. The efficiency of these cuts has been determined, by means of loading
radon derived from the calibrated source, to be 35.9%. However, because of the need
to transfer both the carrier gas and the scintillator, the limiting factor is not the
detector background but the blank (radon introduced during transfer and handling).
Repeated measures of the handling blank allowed for estimation of the blank subtraction uncertainty. A further source of background is steady state leakage of radon
into the sealed counting cells. Counting continued after allowing the radon to decay,
thus, quantifying this background directly. This leakage varied between counting
cells.

22

4. Surface Contamination
4.1. Origins of Surface Contamination
Radio-pure detector materials and components selected through the LZ screening
campaign may be contaminated during the assembly process. Indeed, exposure to
airborne radon at any stage of the assembly process results in the contamination of
detector materials by radon daughters (mainly the long-lived 210 Pb, τ1/2 = 22.3 y)
that plate-out onto surfaces [27]. Environmental dust also deposits on detector material surfaces, and later, radon emanates from these surfaces and could yield daughter
decays in the LXe volume during the LZ data-taking period.
Of particular concern is 214 Pb, which will emit naked betas leading to a continuous ER background down to the WIMP energy window as described in Section 3.1.
Also, 210 Pb will subsequently decay, with its granddaughter 210 Po releasing 5.3 MeV
alphas. This induces neutrons via (α, n) reactions on low-Z nuclei in various detector materials, leading to NR backgrounds. Stable 206 Pb from the decay of 210 Po on
material surfaces may recoil into the LXe volume producing a complicated wall background (0 to 103 keV in energy), which, despite fiducialization, could yield leakage
nuclear recoil events in the region of interest due to poor position reconstruction because of their high radius (near wall) and low energy [28]. Surface contamination by
radon daughters and dust thus contributes to LZ internal ER and NR backgrounds
(at the expected level of about 3% and 38%, respectively) and should therefore be
carefully controlled to meet the low level background requirements of the LZ experiment [1]. To this effect, a stringent cleanliness campaign was developed to monitor
and mitigate this contamination during sub-systems assemblies, mainly the TPC
detector assembly in the SAL.
This section discusses the estimation of the TPC surface contamination from both
Rn and dust accumulated during the different phases of the TPC construction, along
with the cleanliness measures and procedures undertaken to ensure the contamination
levels remain below LZ requirements, and to minimize the internal backgrounds.
4.2. Dust Deposition
The ambient dust in the SAL class 1000 cleanroom comes from two main sources:
dust from outdoor air flowing through the air filtration system, and dust carried in
and generated by personnel and material. The air filtration system consists of a series
of six high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters with fiber glass membranes that
remove dust particulates from outdoor air fed into the cleanroom with an efficiency
≥99.97% for particulates ≥0.3 µm [29]. Recorded dust level (from two Met One GT526S particle counters installed at different locations) within the cleanroom with and
23

without personnel demonstrates that outdoor dust passing through the air filtration
system has a negligible contribution to the dust level within the cleanroom.
The main contribution to dust therefore comes from personnel who bring in dust
from their bodies, cleanroom garbs, or equipment they bring into the cleanroom, as
well as the dust they generate while working in the cleanroom. While continuous air
recirculation within the cleanroom takes part of this dust back out, a portion of it
does deposit onto open surfaces within the room, including those of the TPC, and
should therefore be carefully quantified and controlled. Two technical probes were
developed to estimate dust deposition on the TPC detector components surfaces,
and a dust fallout model was developed for the same purpose.
4.2.1. Technical Probes: Witness Coupons
Witness coupons are small samples ideally made of the same materials as the
detector component that is being assembled. Since dust deposits are expected to
accumulate at the same rate on the detector material, the coupons are then used to
infer the dust deposition on the component. For the LZ detector, the coupons are
mostly PTFE and glass, since these make up a vast majority of the most backgroundsensitive surfaces of the TPC.
Although coupon surfaces should preferably be flat, PMT cable coupons with
curved surfaces were also deployed in an effort to thoroughly probe dust deposition.
All coupons are carefully cleaned with isopropyl alcohol (IPA) soaked non-shedding
wipes and then deployed in pairs, as close as possible to the detector, to collect
dust under similar conditions as the detector surfaces. They are typically harvested
after a couple of weeks, which, based on the cleanroom level and the sensitivity
of the assay technique, is enough time to collect the required amount of dust to
make an assay possible. The coupons are then assayed via optical or fluorescence
microscopy depending on material type in order to enable a contrast between the
dust particulates and the rest of the coupon surface. For the PTFE coupons, since
PTFE does not fluoresce but many dust particulates do, ultraviolet light is shone
on the exposed side of the samples. Glass coupons, on the other hand, may be
imaged under visible light. Both fluorescent or optical images are then processed
via software written in for ImageJ [30] for further contrast to reveal smaller dust
particulates down to 0.5 µm, and accurately determine the size distribution of these
particulates and their contribution to the dust density accumulated on the coupons’
surfaces. Some dust from the optics, which shows up in the same place on each
image (of a clean or dirty coupon as seen on Figure 2), needs to be removed from
the analysis and provides some minor calibration which ensures a consistent imageJ
threshold is set for all images.
24

Figure 2: Optical images of clean (Left) and dirty (Right) witness coupons, post optical processing.
The feature common to them are dust from the optics, and serves as a calibration check.

The number of particulates on the coupons decreases with increasing particulate size [31], such that large particles (≥50 µm) are relatively uncommon but they
may dominate the total mass, as seen in Figure 3. Once the dust particulates size
distribution is determined, the dust density accumulated on the coupon surface (in
ng/cm2 ) is calculated by dividing the accumulated mass (assuming particulates are
spherical in shape with density of 1g/cm3 by the surface area of the coupons.
To obtain the dust fallout rate, witness coupons are assayed both before and
after their exposure. The pre-exposure dust concentration is subtracted from the
post-exposure dust concentration before dividing by the coupon exposure time to
determine the dust fallout rate. Occasionally, mishandling of coupons led to their
results being discarded.
4.2.2. Technical Probes: Tape lifts
Since rough, fluorescing materials cannot be imaged accurately, and because witness coupons never have exactly the history of the material itself, another, more
direct, probe of dust deposition was conducted. These so-called tape lifts are simple pieces of acetate or carbon tapes that are stuck to an assembly piece, and are
lifted to remove dust for assay. Each tape lift can only be utilized on one spot and
only lifted once. To get better statistics more tape lifts on different spots had to
be taken. The choice of tape material depends on the surface texture/roughness of
the component: acetate tape works better on smooth surfaces, like PTFE, while, for
rougher surfaces like titanium, carbon tapes were found to perform better. The tape
lifts are assayed using the same fluorescence microscopy technique utilized for the
witness coupons. Unlike the coupons that collect dust throughout the assembly process, the tape lift assessment is conducted at the end of a main assembly. In addition
25

Total mass contribution (ng/0.5 µm)

Number of particles (/0.5 µm)

103

102

10

1
0

102

10

1
10

20

30

40

0

Radius of dust particles in microns

10

20

30

40

Radius of dust particles in microns

Figure 3: Left: Dust particulate size distribution from fluorescent image analysis of a witness plate.
Particulates of size >50 µm are rarely recorded. Right: Dust particulate mass distribution of the
same witness coupon showing contribution of particulate size to mass. Although most particulates
are small, most of the mass on the coupon is from a small number of larger particulates.

to providing a more direct probe, tape lifts also mitigate against improper use or
mishandling of coupons. For example, while the witness coupons are supposed to be
wiped each time an assembly, sub-assembly or parts are being wiped, this step can
be overlooked, in which case the coupons will collect more dust than the actual assembly. The tape lifts instead give confirmation of the dust level on a final assembly.
However, tape lifts cannot be taken on particularly sensitive parts of the TPC, and
therefore, they do not negate the need for coupons, but rather complement them.
Both tape lifts and coupons are necessary for a full history of the dust deposition on
every component during the assembly process. In addition, having two probes for
dust deposition provided additional opportunities for the calibration and validation
of the dust deposition models used by the LZ collaboration.
4.2.3. Dust Deposition Modeling
As discussed above, the dust density inside the assembly cleanroom depends on
the influx and outflux of dust particulates in the room. Its value per unit particulate
size D could be described by Eq.(1) originally developed by the SNO collaboration [32, 33]:
−1

S
(1)
n(D) = Rin (D) RAE + v(D)
V
where RAE is the cleanroom air exchange rate defined as the volumetric air circulation
rate in the cleanroom divided by the volume V of the cleanroom, v(D) is the Stokes
settling velocity which is dependent on the particulate size [34], Rin (D) is the volume-

26

normalized dust-particulate carry-in rate mostly from personnel, and S is the area
of the projection of the cleanroom volume onto the horizontal plane.
The fallout rate per particulate size in mass per unit area and time could then
be deduced using the continuity equation as shown in Eq.(2)
m(D) =

π
n(D)ρD3 v(D)
6

(2)

where π6 D3 is the particulate volume assuming they are spherical in shape and ρ is
their mass density (≡ 1g/cm3 ). RThe total fallout rate is then obtained by integrating
over all particulate sizes (m = m(D) dD); which for LZ ranges between 0.5 µm to
100 µm as determined by the witness coupons assay results.
However, the carry-in rate per particulate size Rin (D) was not measured by LZ.
Only the air class within the cleanroom was measured using particulate counters.
Consequently, a model of air particulate-size distribution from dust carry-in was
assumed based on ISO-14644-1 and the measured air class (which generally averages less than 10 particles ≥0.5 µm per cubic foot due to our developed cleanliness
protocols) was used to constrain the model. Also, a scaling factor η was added
to the fallout rate in Eq.(2) and was then calibrated using results of fallout rate
measurements from witness coupon assays. Its average value was estimated to be
η = 26.86 ± 5.09. This modified fallout rate, written in Eq.(3) will be referred to as
the modified SNO model.
Z
π
n(D)ρD3 v(D)η dD
(3)
m=
6
The new modified SNO model was then compared with independent tape lift
measurements to ensure agreement within uncertainty between the model and the
measurements. Table 5 shows the agreement, hence validating the modified model.
The η factor may be influenced by several factors but the clearest observed correlation
for an increase in particle fallout rate was with a decrease in the relative humidity
in the cleanroom. It was observed that at the lowest relative humidity level of 25%,
2
the fallout rate was the highest (1.18+0.25
−0.19 ng/cm /hour) while in normal relative
2
humidity levels (35-45 %), the fallout rate was as low as 0.03+0.02
−0.01 ng/cm /hour.
This is expected as, when the cleanroom air is drier, some surfaces like that of
PTFE accumulate more static charges and attract more dust particulates.
It is important to note that, while Table 5 shows the validation of the modified
SNO model, dust densities recorded there are indicative of accumulated dust on some
detector components at a particular period in time. These densities therefore cannot
be used to infer the final dust density on the TPC surface since accumulated dust
27

Table 5: Comparison of calibrated modified SNO model with tape lift assay results
Tape lift date
09/27/2018
11/29/2018

Exposure
time T (days)
1
64

Air class (cts/m3
≥0.5 µm)
6074±600
283±35

Calculated dust density
m ∗ T from model (ng/cm2 )
285 ±53
829 ± 154

Measured dust density
from tape lifts (ng/cm2 )
220+50
−20
885 ± 197

reduced to ∼ 20% of its value every time cleaning was performed on an assembly.
Indeed, tape lift results taken before and after cleaning have verified that cleaning
protocols developed by LZ (e.g. wiping surfaces under UV light with IPA soaked nonshedding wipes) consistently reduce dust to the stated level, and serve as stringent
mitigation procedures against surface dust contamination. This is discussed in more
detail in Section 4.4.
4.2.4. Dust Fallout Calculation for the TPC
The dust deposition rate in mass per unit area per unit time on the various
TPC components was estimated using the modified SNO model. Once individual
estimates are obtained for different components for each daily work shift, the overall
deposited dust density for the ith surface (Mi ) is obtained by taking into account the
exposure time T of that given surface and the mass of dust deposited per unit area
and time (m), and is then given by Eq.(4):
Mi = T m

(4)

Since different areas of the detector are exposed for different times during the
assembly process, one must also take into account the exposed area versus total
detector area. Therefore, the overall dust density (MO ) in ng/cm2 for the entire
TPC is:
P i
Aexposed Mi
(5)
Mo = P i
Atotal
The surface areas, Aiexposed and Aitotal are obtained from a sophisticated information repository developed by LZ to smoothly manage and track detector parts,
their surface areas, and their exposure to ambient cleanroom air during TPC construction. In addition, every instance of detector surface cleaning is recorded and
taken into account, as described above, which allows for an accurate estimation of
the dust contamination on TPC surfaces. The final estimation amounts to a total of (0.64 ± 0.05) g of dust accumulated on the entire TPC for a dust density of
(214 ± 22) ng/cm2 , below LZ requirement of 500 ng/cm2 .

28

4.3. Rn Progeny Plate-out
In addition to dust, another source of background in the experiment comes from
the environmental radon-laden air itself, with radon daughters plating out onto the
surfaces of materials [35] during assembly. To limit plate-out, most assemblies are
done in a radon-reduced cleanroom (RCR) at the SAL. The radon-reduced system
used in the RCR was built by ATEKO, and is a continuous filtration system constantly circulating air through a cold carbon column to filter out the radon at an overall reduction factor of 2200 leading to an ambient radon level averaging <0.5 Bq/m3
as measured by LZ. The RCR high recirculation rate of 8500 cubic feet per minute is
enough to mostly sweep out radon daughters (particularly 218 Po) before they plateout onto detector surfaces. Absolute plate-out prevention is however not possible,
and the remaining 218 Po that plates out is problematic due to its long-lived 210 Pb
daughter which will decay over time in the detector. Therefore, the plate-out rates
on assemblies must be calculated.
Plate-out rates onto materials are often estimated using the Jacobi model [36, 27]
, which, similar to the original SNO model, describes particle deposition from a balance of influx and outflux of particles in the room assuming that the room contents
are well-mixed. This Jacobi model can also be modified to reflect a cleanroom setting, as is the case here [37]. In its original version, the Jacobi model assumes that
all surfaces within a given enclosure or a room are equivalent, with radon daughters ending up on all of them in equal concentrations. Under that assumption, the
area-normalized plate-out rate (surface activity) depends on the conditions of the
enclosure (air circulation rate, Rn concentration, volume, and surface area) within
which the material surfaces are exposed. The 210 Pb plate-out rate expressed as the
decay rate per unit area and unit time, Rp (Bq/m2 /s), is thus described by Eq.(6):
Rp = CRn λP b210

Λd V
Λd + Λ v A

(6)

where CRn is the Rn concentration in the cleanroom (obtained from Durridge Rad7
radon monitors with the monitors’ blank rates subtracted off), λP b210 is the 210 Pb
decay rate, V is the volume of the cleanroom, A is the surface area within the
cleanroom, Λd = v VA is the deposition rate that depends on the diffusion velocity v of
radon daughters measured to be between 5-15 m/h [36], Λv = VR is the air ventilation
rate obtained by dividing the recirculation rate R of the cleanroom HEPA filters by
d
its volume. The ratio ΛdΛ+Λ
corresponds to the probability that a Rn daughter will
v
plate-out before being carried out by the ventilation; which, for the RCR, was around
0.17.

29

It is worth noting that the Jacobi model in Eq.(6) is a direct analog of the
SNO dust deposition model, as seen by expanding n(D) from Eq.(1) into Eq.(2)
and making a number of associations of variables. While the SNO model describes
deposition of dust onto horizontal surfaces, the Jacobi model describes deposition of
Rn daughters on all surfaces, both controlled by a characteristic velocity in a similar
filtration environment. In particular we can identify the particle deposition rate per
unit area per unit time in Eq.(6) as Rp /λP b210 , whereas in Eq.(2) it is expressed
as 6m/πρD3 . The volume-normalized influx Rin of dust particulates in Eq.(1) is
analogous to the volume-normalized rate of production of Rn daughters in Eq.(6),
that is, the Rn activity per unit volume, CRn . The volume-normalized filtration rate
RAE from Eq.(1) is directly associated with λv from Eq.(6). The fallout area S from
Eq.(1) is associated with the available Rn daughter plate-out area A from Eq.(6).
Finally, the stokes velocity v(D) from Eq.(1) is physically similar and mathematically
analogous to the Rn daughter diffusion velocity v in Eq.(6).
However, the assumption in the Jacobi model that plate-out does not depend on
material type has been shown to be incorrect, particularly for materials at the bottom
of the triboelectric series, such as PTFE [38], which could have a plate-out rate M
times higher than for neutral metallic materials. An experiment conducted by the
SDSM&T measured the M factor to be between 50 and 100 [37]. So for LZ, plateout rate estimations using the Jacobi model are thus corrected with a multiplicative
factor M which has a value of M = 1 for plate-out onto metals, and its highest value
M = 100 for plate-out rate on PTFE material surfaces which are naturally charged.
Much of the inner TPC is made from PTFE such that it is essential to mitigate
against this high Rn plate-out. This is achieved by neutralizing the PTFE by using
air deionizing fan units. These units are ISO 10 cleanroom compatible Simco 4008630
- 3 Fan Cleanroom Overhead Air Ionizer units which produce continuous ionized air
through corona discharge, thus neutralizing the otherwise negatively charged PTFE
material. Usage of the fans was taken into account in the plate-out estimations by
reducing the correction factor M to the value of 1 for PTFE surfaces, after the fans’
deployment. Indeed, electrostatic field measurements taken at regular time intervals
between metallic surfaces and PTFE surfaces placed under air deionizing fan units
showed a consistent reading of 0 kV/cm within the uncertainty of the measurement
device, while similar measurement for PTFE material not placed under these fans
read ∼ 0.6 kV/cm, thus demonstrating the successful neutralization of PTFE under
these deionizer units.
The weighted plate-out rate Rw on a given TPC assembly for a single work shift
time period (exposure time T ) is thus given by Eq.(7) where M is the plate-out rate
multiplicative factor described above, A is the surface area of the individual parts
30

making up the assembly, and Rp is the Jacobi plate-out rate per unit area and time
obtained from Eq.(6):
P i
Aexposed (M Rp )T
P i
Rw =
(7)
Atotal
The overall plate-out accumulated for all the work shift time periods for that
assembly is obtained by combining all the weighted rates as was done previously for
the dust estimation.
Plate-out rate estimations are drastically different during and outside working
hours (overnight and during weekends). As expected, the plate-out rates outside
working hours were found to be negligible, of the order of less than 1%. Overall,
the average plate-out for the inner TPC PTFE surfaces in contact with the LXe
is Ravg = (158 ± 13) µBq/m2 , which is below the LZ requirement for the TPC of
500 µBq/m2 . After construction at the SAL, the TPC was sealed in the ICV before being transported underground where it was kept under N2 purge making its
underground surface contamination negligible.
4.4. Cleanliness Protocols to Mitigate against Dust and Rn-progeny Contamination
Following manufacture, most detector components were sent to be cleaned at
AstroPak Inc, a certified professional precision cleaning company. After cleaning,
detector components were sealed in multiple Rn barrier bags under N2 purge. The
redundancy in the bags also provided layers to shed, thereby helping to reduce carryin dust when components were brought into the cleanroom after transportation.
Both aluminized mylar and nylon bags have been shown to be very efficient
against Rn penetration, with reduction factors of 2500 ± 1042 and 130 ± 3 respectively [39]. Once properly bagged, the detector components were shipped to the
SAL facility where they were assembled in the RCR to mitigate, as previously mentioned, against surface contamination during assembly. The cleanliness protocols
implemented within the cleanroom allowed its air class to always be measured at a
significantly lower level (on average less than 10 particles with a size ≥0.5 µm per
cubic foot) than its class 1000 classification.
Upon arrival at the SAL, the outer layer of the shipping bags was removed before
sealed components were brought inside the RCR. Inside the cleanroom, each component was un-bagged under deionizing fans to remove static charges on polymer-like
materials such as PTFE. They were then inspected under UV light to check for
dust particulates, which were cleaned off using Abgenics Essence Gold non-shedding
mono-filament wipes saturated with 99% pure IPA as a basic cleaning method. Other
cleaning methods involved IPA spray or bath followed by blow drying with filtered N2 ,
31

ultra-sonic or high-pressure cleaning using deionized water or IPA, and CO2 blasting
depending on the material type and the amount and type of particulates to be removed. In general, small hardware like screws and bolts were ultrasonically cleaned
in deionized water and IPA bath. Smooth surface components, like PTFE parts,
were wiped down using IPA saturated non-shedding wipes, but this cleaning method
could not be used on rough surfaces, like titanium, because of shedding residues.
Those were instead cleaned with high pressure deionized water. CO2 blasting was
also used to clean the titanium surfaces to remove chemical residues from Astropak
Inc cleaning. As for the PMT cables, wiping them with IPA saturated wipes was
inefficient at removing dust. Instead, they were first sprayed with IPA within the
droplets of which the dust accumulated. The cable was then gently blow-dried with
N2 thus removing the IPA droplets and the dust contained within.
All these methods have been visually investigated for efficiency before usage,
but only the IPA cleaning was quantified, since it was the most used. Figure 4
shows images before and after cleaning of PTFE pieces under UV light, and visually
and qualitatively demonstrates the effectiveness of the cleaning. The quantitative
estimates of the IPA cleaning protocol were done using tape lifts, as described in
Section 4.2.2. The tape lifts were taken on sample coupons before and after cleaning
for the various cleaning methods. The average dust removal efficiency was found to
be about 80%. For instance, tape lift on sample PTFE before cleaning was of 700+700
−100
2
ng/cm2 and after cleaning was 100+20
−9 ng/cm yielding ∼ 90% efficiency.
During assembly, several deionizing fans were used to surround the assembly
area, and ensured complete neutralization of materials, thereby reducing plate-out
as discussed in Section 4.3. Usage of these deionizing fans during assembly was
particularly important as the assembly process involved extensive manipulation and
rubbing which would have otherwise cause charging, increasing the dust and radondaughter plate-out, particularly on PTFE surfaces.
In addition to the deionizing fans, UV light inspections were conducted at regular
time intervals to evaluate dust accumulation on assembly surfaces, and their cleaning
was done every day at the beginning of the work shift. When judged necessary, or
at the end of a sub-assembly, remedial cleaning of the surfaces was conducted (IPA
wiping, IPA bath, vacuuming) with the appropriate cleaning methods, thus removing most of the accumulated dust. Note that, as mentioned previously, remedial
cleanings did not remove all the dust, which is why the witness coupons and tape
lifts mentioned in Section 4.2.1 were still invaluable in assessing the actual amount
of dust collected on the assemblies.
Finally, cleanroom garbs worn by personnel working on the assembly were changed
after every work shift to reduce carry-in dust, and wiped off with a lint roller multiple
32

Figure 4: Pictures of some PTFE components (used on the PMT arrays) under UV light before
(left and center) and after (right) cleaning with IPA saturated non-shedding mono-filament wipes.
Fluorescent specks are dust particulates which are removed after cleaning the pieces in an IPA bath
as seen in the right picture.

times during work to remove particulates that could deposit onto detector surfaces.
At the end of all daily shifts, smaller detector components were sealed in double
nylon bags which prevented plate-out since the components were then no longer in
contact with the cleanroom air. Larger components like the PMT arrays, on the
other hand, had bespoke airtight enclosures, allowing them to be kept under filtered
and ventilated air from an extra HEPA filter unit or under N2 purge, allowing further
mitigation against Rn plate-out.
All of the described procedures have ensured that exposure to Rn and dust during
the assembly process was minimal, surpassing LZ requirements, as stated, for both
dust and plate-out of radon progeny.
5. Selected Highlights from the Assay Program
The LZ design sensitivity imposes limits to radioactivity from particular components, principally items such as PMTs which are close to or in contact with the
fiducial volume, thus demanding dedicated fixed contamination screening campaigns
to meet requirements. The assay program also included dedicated QC and QA
elements to ensure radioactivity and cleanliness compliance throughout all manufacturing processes, such as through the construction of the Ti cryostat. Dedicated
radon emanation measurement campaigns were performed on complete purification

33

and recirculation sub-systems that may contribute to radon, as well as in-situ measurements of the inner cryostat with the TPC sealed within. The assay program
also included construction and deployment of a dedicated detector system to determine radioactivity in the GdLS for the LZ OD system. In the following sub-sections,
we present these dedicated campaigns in order to illustrate through specific examples the deployment of fixed contaminant assays, QA, radon assays, and detector
construction and deployment.
5.1. Hamamatsu R11410 PMT HPGe Assay Program
LZ employs three different models of PMT. The main active volume will be
viewed by 494 76 mm (3-inch) Hamamatsu R11410 PMTs. Other regions containing xenon are instrumented using a combination of 30 mm Hamamatsu R8520 and
56 mm Hamamatsu R8778 PMTs with the latter having been repurposed having been
used in the LUX dark matter experiment [40]. Additionally, the LZ OD system is
instrumented using 202 mm (8-inch) Hamamatsu R5912 PMTs.
The radioactive background of the R11410 PMTs is of particular importance
as these sit adjacent to the main active volume of LZ. In order to ensure that
these met the intrinsic radioactivity requirements of 3.0/3.0/30/2.5 mBq/PMT for
238
U/232 Th/40 K/60 Co, respectively, a comprehensive screening program was conducted. Initially, a subset of the raw material used for the construction of the tubes
was screened across detectors both at SURF and at Boulby, and from these measurements, a bottom-up prediction of the intrinsic radioactivity of the final tubes was
calculated. This calculation is discussed in detail in [3].
Following the raw material screening program, the collaboration was satisfied that
PMTs of the required radiopurity could be produced. However, even with knowledge
of the radiopurity of the raw materials, it was important to repeat the screening process for the final tubes. This required substantial gamma-ray spectroscopy detector
time both at SURF and at Boulby. The program began with an initial batch of tubes
being screened at Boulby between August 2016 and February 2017. Over 32 weeks,
102 PMTs were screened and a substantial amount of background data was acquired.
Figure 5 shows comparisons between a combination of all PMT runs on the detectors
used in this campaign. For protection and cleanliness purposes, the R11410 PMTs
assayed at Boulby were screened with PTFE tape wrapped around their body and
with protective foam on the pins at the base of the PMT. Subsequently, the tape
and foam were screened and their contribution (along with the contribution from the
holder and detector setup backgrounds) subtracted to give final contamination levels
for the tubes presented here. Screening of tubes at SURF was performed following
performance testing at Brown University for which the foam and PTFE tape needed
34

Combined PMTs

103

Counts [/keV/day]

Counts [/keV/day]

to be removed. No additional correction was required for this data. The full PMT
screening program assayed 229 of the 494 R11410 tubes used in the LZ detector.

Holder Background

102
10

10

1

10−1

10−1

1000

10−20

2000
3000
Energy [keV]

Holder Background

102

1

10−20

Combined PMTs

103

1000

2000
3000
Energy [keV]

Figure 5: Combined spectra for all R11410 PMT runs using Chaloner (left) and Lunehead (right)
at the Boulby Underground Germanium Suite. In both cases, the background spectrum includes
the holders used to secure PMTs in place in the detector castles.

The tests of individual components showed that the radioactive contaminants
were not uniformly distributed. Not only is this the case, but the relative levels of
238
U, 232 Th and 40 K were different in each component. Ordinarily, when calculating
a geometric efficiency for an assayed material or component (using GEANT4 [41] in
this case), gamma-rays are fired uniformly from the component being studied. In
order to allow for non-uniform distribution of radioactivity when determining specific
activities for the assayed PMTs, geometric efficiency curves had to be calculated
for individual isotopes. The distribution of simulated gamma-rays was determined
using the expected contamination distribution. This is detailed in Table 6 where
the three largest components (both by mass and, in the case of the ceramic stem,
by radioactive content) are used to represent the whole PMT. In the case of all
other isotopes (detailed in Tables 7 and 8), the contamination was assumed to be
distributed uniformly.
The expected distributions of contamination detailed in Table 6 do not take
into account one important unknown factor: the distribution of 40 K as the process of
forming a PMT photocathode requires the evaporation of potassium onto the inside of
the quartz window face of the PMT. This adds a substantial systematic uncertainty to
35

the final measured values of 40 K in this study. As an approximation, the distribution
of 40 K in the PMTs was modified in order to give a reasonable systematic error on
each setup. The systematic error is set assuming a distribution of 0.1, 0.45 and
0.45 for the ceramic, the Kovar and the quartz face, respectively. In the case of
the Chaloner detector, where PMTs are placed so that the pins are the closest part
to the front face of the detector and the quartz window the furthest, a systematic
error of 125% is calculated. In the case of SOLO, where PMTs uniformly surround
the detector, there is no substantial systematic error as the geometric efficiency has
a very weak dependence on the distribution of 40 K in the PMTs. The systematic
errors for 40 K are captured in Table 6. In all other isotopes, it was assumed that the
distribution of radiocontaminants follows expectation so only statistical errors are
presented.
Table 6: Fractional contamination levels for 238 U, 232 Th and 40 K from individual R11410 component assay. The PMT is split into major components and the expected distribution of activity is
calculated using individual component measurements. This distribution acts as weighting factor
when determining the contribution of each individual component to the overall efficiency. In the
238
U and 232 Th, secular equilibrium is assumed.

Isotope

Ceramic
Stem

Kovar
Bulb

Quartz
Face

238

0.79
0.45
0.71

0.17
0.45
0.23

0.04
0.10
0.06

U
Th
40
K

232

Overall average values are calculated for assayed tubes and these are presented in
Table 7. Even allowing for the systematic error in the measurement, it is clear that
there is substantial variation in the levels of 40 K found in the tubes. This is likely due
to variability in the manufacturing process as uniformity in 40 K values is seen across
batches of PMTs produced at similar times. Additionally, some significant variation
in 60 Co can be seen in the various batches of tubes. The combined values were calculated using two methods. The first ignores data where only upper limits are obtained
and relies solely on measured values whereas the second incorporates measured 90%
CL upper limits as measured values. For 232 Th and 235 U, the incorporation of upper
limits substantially reduces the combined value.
In addition to values for U (238 U, 235 U, 210 Pb), 232 Th, 40 K and 60 Co, small levels
of contamination from other isotopes are observed. This includes isotopes of cobalt
(other than 60 Co), 137 Cs and the meta-stable 110m Ag isotope as reported in [42].
36

Table 7: Combined activities for all runs in the LZ PMT screening program. In total, 233 PMTs
were screened across six detectors in batches of varying sizes. For each detector, all acquired
spectra are summed and the resultant peaks fitted for use in the calculation. For the combined
values, detection errors are combined in quadrature. Two combined values are presented. One
(M O) uses measured values only, ignoring upper limits and the other (U L) incorporates upper
limits as measured values. The component average comes from [3]. We include for comparison the
results from the equivalent assay campaign of an earlier model of Hamamatsu R11410 PMT by
Xenon1T, taken from [42].
Detector

# PMTs Total Live

238

Ue

238

Ul

232

Assayed Time (d)
Chaloner
Lunehead
SOLO
Mordred
Maeve
Morgan

232
40
60
The
Thl
K
Co
all values in mBq/PMT

235

U

210

Pb

48
160
4.8 ± 1.3 1.5 ± 0.3
< 0.3
< 0.1
5.4+9.9
0.6 ± 0.3 0.7 ± 0.4 7.1 ± 2.9
−3.1
54
144
< 4.1 0.9 ± 0.3
< 0.2
< 0.2
14.0+3.4
0.7 ± 0.1 0.6 ± 0.6
−2.0
90
121
< 7.1 0.9 ± 0.1
< 0.1
0.5 ± 0.2 13.0 ± 0.2 1.0 ± 0.1 < 0.1
27
45
5.6 ± 4.9 < 0.2
0.9 ± 0.4 0.9 ± 0.2 6.4+3.0
3.0 ± 0.2 1.4 ± 0.9
< 28
−2.8
10
28.7
< 10
0.4 ± 0.3 1.9 ± 1.5 0.9 ± 0.3 11.0+3.0
6.2
±
0.3
<
0.3
−4.2
4
17.4
< 15
< 0.8
3.0 ± 1.9
< 0.8
6.3+6.6
6.0
±
0.7
<
0.4
−7.1
Combined (MO) 5.0 ± 2.1 0.9 ± 0.2 1.4 ± 0.8 0.8 ± 0.2
0.8
±
0.6
7.1
±
2.9
12.2+1.1
1.9 ± 0.2
−0.9
Combined (UL) 4.3 ± 2.9 0.6 ± 0.2 0.20 ± 0.15 0.3 ± 0.1
0.2 ± 0.2 8.3 ± 4.8
Component Average < 13.3
< 0.6
< 0.6
< 0.6
< 2.9
< 0.5
< 0.1
LZ Requirement
< 3.0
< 3.0
< 3.0
< 30
< 2.5
Xenon1T < 12.9 0.5 ± 0.1 0.5 ± 0.1 0.4 ± 0.1 12 ± 2 0.7 ± 0.1 0.4 ± 0.1
-

Results from measurements of these isotopes made with the Chaloner and Lunehead
detectors at Boulby are shown in Table 8.
Table 8: Combined contaminations from the Chaloner (BEGe) and Lunehead (p-type) detectors at
Boulby for the less common isotopes detected when combining all PMT runs together. As we have
no prior knowledge of the distribution of contamination for these isotopes we include a systematic
uncertainty due to potential variations in geometric efficiency.
137

Detector
Chaloner
Lunehead

Cs

0.21+0.48
−0.12
0.51 ± 0.03

110m

57
Ag
Co
all values in mBq/PMT

0.07+0.19
−0.05
0.13 ± 0.02

0.25+0.64
−0.11
0.25 ± 0.03

58

Co

0.20+0.48
−0.10
0.37 ± 0.03

As an example, the distribution of measured values of 40 K in the assayed PMTs
along with their distribution in the upper and lower PMT arrays of LZ are shown in
Figure 6. For those PMTs not assayed, the average value of 12.2+1.1
−0.9 mBq/PMT, as
given in Table 7 is used. Also shown in Figure 6 is the distribution of measured 40 K
values. This figure incorporates both measured values and upper limits.

37

No. PMTs

Activity - 40K
Upper Limits
Measured Values

40

20

10
20
30
Specific Activity (mBq/PMT)

LZ PMT Top Array - 40K

LZ PMT Bottom Array - 40K

20
15

0
10

−500

5

−500

0
X (mm)

500

Y (mm)

Y (mm)

500

25
Specific Activity (mBq/PMT)

25

20
15

0
10

−500

5

−500

500
Total PMTs = 253
Screened PMTs = 58

0
X (mm)

Specific Activity (mBq/PMT)

0
0

500
Total PMTs = 241
Screened PMTs = 171

Figure 6: Top: Distribution of measured value for 40 K in the LZ PMT assay program. Measured
values are plotted in blue and upper limits are plotted in red. Bottom, left and right: Distribution of
40
K contamination for the top and bottom arrays, respectively. For tubes which were not measured,
+1.1
the calculated average value of 12.2−0.9
mBq/PMT, as given in Table 7 is used.

5.2. ICP-MS Titanium QC and QA assays
In the early stages of the LZ experiment, an extensive R&D campaign was conducted to source and produce enough titanium for the cryostat vessels of the detector.
The inner and the outer cryostat vessels (ICV and OCV, respectively), containing
the TPC and the 10 tonnes of LXe, make up a significant bulk of the LZ detector.
38

Due to their scale and proximity to the TPC, it was necessary to ensure ultra-low
levels of radiopurity for the 238 U and 232 Th isotopes as well as 40 K and 60 Co. A detailed analysis using ICP-MS and gamma-ray spectroscopy of 22 different titanium
samples was conducted, and the sample of the HN3469 product manufactured by
TIMET was found to have the lowest background. The measured activities for 238 U,
232
Th, 60 Co and 40 K from the sample are significantly lower than requirements and
were the lowest reported to date [14].
The titanium R&D campaign was followed by a radiopurity screening program to
monitor and mitigate the risk of radioactive contamination during the construction
process of the vessels. Although the bulk titanium was found to be ultra-pure,
the manufacturing stage of the vessels possessed a large risk for contamination. In
assessing the radiopurity of the welding process a welding sample issued to the project
as one of the many regular samples for assessment in the LZ QC and QA program,
was measured to have 6 ppb of thorium—equating to roughly 100 times higher than
the concentration initially measured in the TIMET HN3469. Material used for the
test sample was from the LZ titanium stock and the welding was performed with
an automatic tungsten inert gas (TIG) machine purportedly using the lanthanated
tungsten electrodes commonly used by the manufacturer (Loterios).
The high levels of thorium found in the sample prompted a suspension of the
cryostat production and the start of a screening campaign to identify the source
of the contamination. Over a period of two months, the campaign performed 24
radioassays with HPGe detectors and 67 ICP-MS measurements, screening representative samples from the titanium stock, welding wires and electrodes used by
Loterios. Assays of two welding electrodes used by Loterios and removed from the
TIG and plasma machines located in the cryostat production area showed a very
high level of thorium. The 232 The levels, as measured by the ICP-MS system, resulted in (3.20 ± 0.16) ppb of Th, in comparison to (0.069 ± 0.007) ppb measured for
the TIMET HN3469 stock. This indicated that the unexpected excess in Th activity
was due to an isolated and erroneous use of a small number of thoriated electrodes,
as opposed to the pre-agreed lanthanated tungsten electrodes throughout.
Additionally, it was found that the standard lanthanated tungsten electrodes
used do contain a small amount of thorium which, in the welding process, gets
into the weld at the level of 0.7 ppb. Although this is not ideal, it would not have
explained the observed increase of thorium in the welded sample which prompted
this contamination study.
The rapid turnaround for uranium and thorium assays at sub-ppb levels made
possible by the ICP-MS system allowed LZ to arrest production, thoroughly investigate and precisely identify the contaminant introduced by the manufacturing
39

process. Upon these findings, appropriate control measures were implemented in
the cryostat manufacturing process to avoid additional inadvertent use of thoriated
welding electrodes. This is a key example of how the LZ QA program identified a potentially serious manufacturing error which otherwise would have had the potential
to substantially increase the overall thorium background in LZ.
5.3. Radon Emanation Studies
Sensitivity projections for LZ presented in [1] include the effect of the online
charcoal-based radon-removal system, operating continuously to scrub gaseous Xe
[3, 26]. Projections also assume the expected suppression of radon diffusion in certain
materials at low temperatures. In this article, Table A5 presents the as-measured
results from room temperature assays of individual materials and components. Room
temperature measurements from fully assembled LZ systems and contributions from
individually screened components within those systems are highlighted in Figure 7.
Measurements for three of these assemblies are discussed in the following sub-sections,
with radon emanation results.
5.3.1. Inner Cryostat Vessel
Radon emanation from the ICV was measured several times during various integration stages of the construction of the skin veto region and the TPC installation.
The final assay was made following after the ICV was fully complete and sealed. The
cryostat at this stage housed both the top and the bottom PMT arrays for the TPC
and the skin veto regions, and their corresponding PMT bases and cables. Furthermore, the entire field cage, PTFE coating, various sensors, and conduit volumes of
the cables were a part of these measurement.
A portable radon trapping system was deployed underground at SURF with minimal plumbing due to space constraints. After leak-checking and purging, the trapping system was opened to the ICV and the emanated gas was harvested over a
6.3 hour period—equivalent to 18.25% of the gas within the ICV. After the harvest,
the trap was carefully disconnected and transported to SDSM&T radon facility for
screening. The radon trap also captures outgassing molecular species that would
serve as neutralisers of positively charged radon-daughters, leading to a drop in detection efficiency. An in-house procedure was followed to separate out these species
by transferring the sample from a cold trap held at -109◦ C to one at -196◦ C with
sufficient flow to effectively transfer all of the radon atoms while leaving most of the
contaminants behind. This process was repeated until measurements with a residual gas analyzer indicated no further reduction in contaminant concentration, after
which the sample was transferred to the detection chamber via a secondary small
cold trap.
40

Results indicate a room-temperature emanation rate of 46.1+4.0
−3.8 mBq under the
assumption of an even sampling of the radon within the ICV.
5.3.2. Xenon Circulation System
The xenon gas circulation system brings together multiple components and surfaces that are potential radon emitters. The system consists of two gas compressors,
a heated zirconium getter, and a main valve and instrumentation panel. The compressors (model A2-5/15 from Fluitron) have two heads, each enclosing a flexible
all-metal diaphragm sealed with copper plating. Check valves, accumulation bottles,
and associated plumbing and instrumentation are also included in the compressor
assemblies. The compressors operate in parallel to achieve a gas flow rate of 500
standard liters per minute. Much of the system was fabricated at the University of
Wisconsin’s Physical Sciences Laboratory. Whilst there, a portable radon trapping
system was used to harvest emanation samples that were then shipped to shipped to
the U. Maryland radon facility for counting. Initial radon emanation measurements
of compressor 2 found that the heads emanated <1 mBq each; however, the integrated
compressor skid assembly presented ∼17 mBq. After replacing most of the welded
stainless steel plumbing and etching the accumulation bottles in citric acid, the rate
was reduced to 1.48 ± 0.31 mBq. A similar treatment was applied to compressor 1
but this compressor was not radon emanated and hence is assumed to have the same
rate as compressor 2. The main circulation panel contains most of the valves and
instrumentation exposed to the xenon in gas phase, and it was found to contribute
0.74 mBq of radon. The fully loaded getter (model PS5-MGT50-R-535 from SAES)
was emanated at its operational temperature of 400◦ C using helium carrier gas and
its emanation rate was determined to be 2.26 mBq. The entire circulation system
amounted to a total emanation rate of 5.22 ± 0.75 mBq.
5.3.3. Xenon Tower
The xenon tower is a cryogenic system that thermally couples the gaseous and
LXe portions of the purification circuit for efficient heat transfer, serving to vaporize
and re-condense the liquid for continuous purification. It consists of a two-phase
heat exchanger (supplied from Standard Xchange), three cryogenic valves (manufactured by WAKE), a sub-cooler/phase-separator vessel to hold LXe returning to
the detector, a reservoir vessel to hold liquid exiting the detector, two liquid xenon
purity monitors, and several custom liquid xenon heat exchangers. The tower can
be viewed as having two sides: the heat exchanger assembly on one side and the
weir reservoir, sub-cooler and purity monitor on the other. Radon emanation from
sub-components was measured prior to full integration of the xenon tower and was
found to contribute a total of <1 mBq.
41

A preliminary measurement of the tower after integration found a very high radon
activity in the reservoir side, possibly due to a leak into the system from laboratory
air. As a precautionary measure, the reservoir vessel was flushed with a concentrated
solution designed for removing radioactive contamination (RadiacwashTM ) and rinsed
with deionized water. The portable radon trap was then deployed underground to
measure the two sides of the complete xenon tower prior to the installation of the
purity monitor and found a total emanation rate of 3.14+0.86
−0.81 mBq.

Figure 7: Approximate schematic of LZ highlighting key sub-systems and xenon circulation paths
in and out of the ICV. The diagram condenses some of the key radon emanation measurements that
will contribute to the overall radon budget of LZ. The results presented in green text are directly
from measurements and those in black show summed results for that particular component. All
of the results shown are measurements made at room temperature and do not include any radon
removal or cold temperature suppression expected under operational conditions.

5.4. GdLS screener for the Outer Detector (OD)
Achieving a low level of radioimpurities in the 17.3 t of GdLS used in the LZ
OD is crucial for its performance as both an effective monitor of the experiment’s
42

backgrounds and as an efficient veto for coincident events in the TPC. The admissible
radioactive impurity levels in the GdLS are derived from the LZ requirement for a
false veto rate of <5% assuming an energy threshold of 200 keV and a maximum
coincidence window of 500 µs between an interaction in the TPC and the OD. This
restricts the event rate in the full 17.3 t of GdLS to be <100 Hz. Approximately
39 Hz is expected from a combination of radioactivity in LZ construction materials
and the flux of gamma-rays in the experimental hall which penetrate the water shield
to reach the OD [43]. This allows for at most 61 Hz of rate to arise from impurities
dissolved in the GdLS.
GdLS generally features a combination of common radioimpurities and more exotic isotopes which enter during the Gd-loading process. Common radioisotopes
include 14 C, 85 Kr, 40 K, and those in the 238 U and 232 Th chains, while the more unusual isotopes include 138 La, 176 Lu, 147 Sm, 152 Gd, and those in the 235 U decay chain.
Chemical processing and purification of the components of GdLS alters the relative
abundance of these isotopes, often resulting in out-of-equilibrium activities within
decay chains [44].
Before it is added to LS, the raw gadolinium product (in the form of GdCl3 ) is
purified via pH-controlled partial hydrolysis. During this process, certain actinides
including uranium and thorium are precipitated out of solution, but others such as
actinium itself tend to remain in solution [44]. The purified Gd is then combined
with the chelating ligand TMHA, or 3,5,5-trimethylhexanoic acid. The resulting
Gd(TMHA)3 compound is dissolved in the non-polar LS solvent, linear alkylbenzene,
to achieve a final concentration of 0.1% Gd by mass.
Measurements of the radioactive impurity concentrations in both Gd-loaded and
unloaded scintillator samples were made using a dedicated liquid scintillation counter
known as the “LS Screener”. The LS Screener was comprised of an acrylic vessel containing approximately 23 kg of scintillator and three R11410 PMTs. For each sample
measurement, the detector was lowered into the ultra-low background environment
at the center of the filled LZ water tank. A detailed description of that detector and
the results from those measurement campaigns are published in [4]. Two results from
that work yielded results particularly significant for the OD’s performance. First, a
fit using the 14 C β shape (Q = 156 keV) to the low-energy spectrum collected with
the unloaded scintillator sample measured the 14 C/12 C atom fraction in the LS to
be (2.83 ± 0.06(stat.) ± 0.01(sys.)) × 10−17 . This concentration of 14 C validates that
hydrocarbons used for the GdLS chemicals are suitably derived from underground
sources (as opposed to biogenic sources). As a result, the expected rates of single
and pile-up pulses from 14 C near the OD threshold are negligible. Second, pulse
shape discrimination and delayed coincidence counting were used to measure the
43

concentrations of α and β-emitting radioisotopes with relatively small uncertainties.
In particular, a significant amount of activity from the 235 U series was measured by
identifying the unique pulse pair from 219 Rn-215 Po in the GdLS sample. No such
activity was observed in the unloaded LS sample, confirming that this activity is
introduced with the Gd.
To further characterize the impact of loading with Gd, a 0.307 kg sample of the
same purified Gd(TMHA)3 compound used in the LS Screener was counted by HPGe
at the BHUC. A large activity from 176 Lu was easily detected above background
confirming the presence of rare earth impurities. Additionally, the strong γ-line
from 235 U was not detected, suggesting that equilibrium is broken during purification
causing either 231 Pa or 227 Ac to serve as the head of the decay chain.
These findings motivated a modification to the Gd purification procedure in which
a higher pH was used to more aggressively precipitate out impurities at the cost of
a slightly lower Gd yield. To confirm the effectiveness of this procedure, a larger,
1.44 kg sample of the newly purified Gd(TMHA)3 was counted using HPGe at the
BHUC. Table 9 reports the results before and after the new purification as well as the
reduction factor in each isotope’s central value or quoted upper limit. Concentrations
are given per kg of Gd(TMHA)3 and per kg of LZ GdLS, doped to 0.1% Gd by
mass. The observed reduction in the detected 176 Lu concentration demonstrates
the effectiveness of the purification on rare earth metals. No significant signatures
from 227 Ac and its daughters in the newer sample were observed. By applying the
reduction factors in Table 9 to the results in [4], the total OD rate from GdLS
radioimpurities above 200 keV is predicted to be <10 Hz, well below the requirement.
https://www.overleaf.com/project/5c5310397a978a1f50a01c1c
6. Conclusion
The LZ collaboration has concluded one of the most wide ranging and sensitive
assay programs performed to-date for a rare event search experiment, successfully
meeting requirements on fixed contaminants, radon emanation, and surface cleanliness. This program began in October 2013 and has continued for more than six
years, building a database of over 1200 entries. The results obtained in the screening
program have been used to select the materials used in the final construction of the
LZ detector, to ensure radioactivity compliance through to detector assembly, and
to inform the background model used to determine the predicted sensitivity of LZ.
In parallel to these assay efforts, a comprehensive set of cleanliness quality assurance protocols were developed and implemented. These sought to ensure that
additional radiocontaminants were not introduced into the detector in the construction period, particularly during the time when the TPC was being constructed, up
44

Table 9: Results from HPGe counting of two purified Gd(TMHA)3 powder samples given in mBq/kg
of Gd(TMHA)3 . For GdLS, loaded to 0.1% Gd by mass, the values listed can be reduced by a factor
of 250. The reduction factors of the limits/central values for the improved purification results are
also given. Limits are given at 1σ confidence level. The late 235 U chain is defined as starting at
231
Pa as discussed in [4].
Isotope or 0.307 kg, Initial Purification 1.44 kg, Improved Purification
Reduction
Subchain
mBq/(kg Gd(TMHA)3 )
mBq/(kg Gd(TMHA)3 )
238
Ue
< 259
< 4.36
59.4
238
23(5)
2.6(9)
8.8
Ul
235
Ue
< 2.8
< 4.5
0.6
235
Ul
26(10)
< 3.0
8.7
232
< 6.7
< 0.89
7.5
The
232
< 5.1
< 0.76
6.7
Thl
40
K
< 56
< 2.29
24.5
138
La
< 1.4
< 0.42
3.3
176
Lu
75(18)
2.03(46)
36.9

until the point where it was sealed within the inner cryostat vessel for transportation
to the underground laboratory at SURF.
Comprehensive tables of results for the LZ assay program are presented in Appendix A, documenting the results from the LZ assays performed since 2013.
7. Acknowledgements
The LZ collaboration lost one of its dedicated researchers this year and the father of low background assay at Berkeley Lab, Al Smith. For more than sixty years,
he pursued low background assays and identification of materials in support of rare
search experiments including CDMS, SNO, KamLAND, Daya Bay, KATRIN, Majorana Demonstrator, LUX, and LZ. We also wish to acknowledge the contributions
from Emma Meehan at the Boulby Underground Laboratory for her help. The
research supporting this work took place in whole or in part at the Sanford Underground Research Facility (SURF) in Lead, South Dakota. Funding for this work is
supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of High Energy Physics under Contract Numbers DE-AC02-05CH11231, DE-SC0020216, DESC0012704, DE-SC0010010, DE-AC02-07CH11359, DE-SC0012161, DE-SC0014223,
DE-FG02-13ER42020, DE-SC0009999, DE-NA0003180, DE-SC0011702,
DE-SC0010072, DE-SC0015708, DE-SC0006605, DE-FG02-10ER46709,
UW PRJ82AJ, DE-SC0013542, DE-AC02-76SF00515, DE-SC0019066, DE-AC5245

07NA27344, & DE-SC0012447. This research was also supported by U.S. National
Science Foundation (NSF); the U.K. Science & Technology Facilities Council under
award numbers, ST/M003655/1, ST/M003981/1, ST/M003744/1, ST/M003639/1,
ST/M003604/1, and ST/M003469/1; Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT) under award numbers PTDC/FIS-ÂPAR/28567/2017; the Institute
for Basic Science, Korea (budget numbers IBS-R016-D1); University College London and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory thank the U.K. Royal Society for
travel funds under the International Exchange Scheme (IE141517). We acknowledge
additional support from the STFC Boulby Underground Laboratory in the U.K.,
the GridPP Collaboration [45, 46], in particular at Imperial College London and additional support by the University College London (UCL) Cosmoparticle Initiative.
This research used resources of the National Energy Research Scientific Computing
Center, a DOE Office of Science User Facility supported by the Office of Science
of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. The
University of Edinburgh is a charitable body, registered in Scotland, with the registration number SC005336. The assistance of SURF and its personnel in providing
physical access and general logistical and technical support is acknowledged.
References
[1] D. S. Akerib, et al., Projected WIMP sensitivity of the LUX-ZEPLIN (LZ) dark
matter experiment, Phys. Rev. D 101 (5) (2018) 052002. arXiv:{1802.06039},
doi:{10.1103/PhysRevD.101.052002}.
[2] D. S. Akerib, et al., The LUX-ZEPLIN (LZ) experiment, Nucl. Instrum.
Meth. A953 (2020) 163047. arXiv:{1910.09124}, doi:{10.1016/j.nima.
2019.163047}.
[3] B. J. Mount, et al., LUX-ZEPLIN (LZ) technical design report (2017). arXiv:
{1703.09144}.
[4] S. J. Haselschwardt, et al., A liquid scintillation detector for radioassay of
gadolinium-loaded liquid scintillator for the LZ outer detector , Nucl. Instrum.
Meth. A937 (2019) 148–163. arXiv:{1808.05595}, doi:{10.1016/j.nima.
2019.05.055}.
[5] P. R. Scovell, et al., Low background gamma spectroscopy at the Boulby Underground Laboratory, Astropart. Phys. 97 (2018) 160–173. arXiv:{1708.06086},
doi:{10.1016/j.astropartphys.2017.11.006}.

46

[6] B. J. Mount, et al., Black Hills State University Underground Campus, Appl.
Radiat. Isot. 126 (2017) 130–133. doi:{10.1016/j.apradiso.2017.02.025}.
[7] D. S. Akerib, et al., Radiogenic and muon-Induced backgrounds in the LUX
dark matter detector, Astropart. Phys. 62 (2015) 33–46. arXiv:{1403.1299},
doi:{10.1016/j.astropartphys.2014.07.009}.
[8] D. S. Akerib, et al., First results from the LUX dark matter experiment at the
Sanford Underground Research Facility, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112 (2014) 091303.
arXiv:{1310.8214}, doi:{10.1103/PhysRevLett.112.091303}.
[9] D. S. Akerib, et al., Results from a search for dark matter in the complete
LUX exposure, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118 (2) (2017) 021303. arXiv:{1608.07648},
doi:{10.1103/PhysRevLett.118.021303}.
[10] A. Alessandrello, et al., Measurements on radioactivity of ancient roman lead to
be used as shield in searches for rare events, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in
Physics Research Section B: Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms 61 (1)
(1991) 106 – 117. doi:{https://doi.org/10.1016/0168-583X(91)95569-Y}.
[11] G. J. Alner, et al., First limits on WIMP nuclear recoil signals in ZEPLIN-II: A
two phase xenon detector for dark matter detection, Astropart. Phys. 28 (2007)
287–302.
arXiv:{astro-ph/0701858}, doi:{10.1016/j.astropartphys.
2007.06.002}.
[12] H. M. Araújo, et al., Radioactivity backgrounds in ZEPLIN-III, Astropart. Phys.
35 (2012) 495–502. arXiv:{1104.3538}, doi:{10.1016/j.astropartphys.
2011.11.001}.
[13] D. Yu. Akimov, et al., WIMP-nucleon cross-section results from the second
science run of ZEPLIN-III, Phys. Lett. B709 (2012) 14–20. arXiv:{1110.4769},
doi:{10.1016/j.physletb.2012.01.064}.
[14] D. S. Akerib, et al., Identification of radiopure titanium for the LZ dark matter
experiment and future rare event searches, Astropart. Phys. 96 (2017) 1–10.
arXiv:{1702.02646}, doi:{10.1016/j.astropartphys.2017.09.002}.
[15] R. Noel, et al., Measuring and understanding radon adsorption in microporous
materials, AIP Conf. Proc. 1672 (1) (2015) 070001. doi:{10.1063/1.4927992}.
[16] A. R. Smith, et al., Low background counting at LBNL, Phys. Procedia 61
(2015) 787–795. doi:{10.1016/j.phpro.2014.12.101}.
47

[17] R. H. M. Tsang, et al., GEANT4 models of HPGe detectors for radioassay, Nucl.
Instrum. Meth. A935 (2019) 75–82. arXiv:{1902.06847}, doi:{10.1016/j.
nima.2019.04.085}.
[18] D. C. Malling, et al., Dark matter search backgrounds from primordial radionuclide chain disequilibrium (2013). arXiv:{1305.5183}.
[19] J. Dobson, et al., Ultra-low background mass spectrometry for rare-event
searches, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. AarXiv:{1708.08860}, doi:{https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.nima.2017.10.014}.
[20] D. S. Leonard, et al., Trace radioactive impurities in final construction materials
for EXO-200, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A871 (2017) 169–179. arXiv:{1703.10799},
doi:{10.1016/j.nima.2017.04.049}.
[21] D. S. Leonard, et al., Systematic study of trace radioactive impurities in candidate construction materials for EXO-200, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A591 (2008)
490–509. arXiv:{0709.4524}, doi:{10.1016/j.nima.2008.03.001}.
[22] P. Pagelkopf, et al., Neutralisation rate and the fraction of the positive 218Poclusters in air, Atmospheric Environment 37 (8) (2003) 1057 – 1064. doi:
{https://doi.org/10.1016/S1352-2310(02)00997-4}.
[23] J. B. Albert, et al., Investigation of radioactivity-induced backgrounds in EXO200, Phys. Rev. C92 (1) (2015) 015503. arXiv:{1503.06241}, doi:{10.1103/
PhysRevC.92.015503}.
[24] E. H. Miller, et al., Constraining radon backgrounds in LZ, AIP Conf. Proc.
1921 (1) (2018) 050003. arXiv:{1708.08533}, doi:{10.1063/1.5018996}.
[25] C. Mitsuda, et al., Development of super-high sensitivity radon detector for
the Super-Kamiokande detector, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A497 (2003) 414–428.
doi:{10.1016/S0168-9002(02)01923-X}.
[26] K. Pushkin, et al., Study of radon reduction in gases for rare event search
experiments, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A903 (2018) 267–276. arXiv:{1805.11306},
doi:{10.1016/j.nima.2018.06.076}.
[27] W. Jacobi, Activity and potential alpha-energy of 222 radon and 220 radondaughters in different air atmospheres, Health Physics 22 (5) (1972) 441–450.

48

[28] D. Akerib, S. Alsum, H. Araújo, X. Bai, A. Bailey, J. Balajthy, P. Beltrame,
E. Bernard, A. Bernstein, T. Biesiadzinski, et al., Position reconstruction in lux,
Journal of Instrumentation 13 (02) (2018) P02001.
[29] US Department of Energy (DOE), Specification for HEPA filters used by DOE
contractors (1997).
[30] C. T. Rueden, et al., ImageJ2: ImageJ for the next generation of scientific image
data, CoRR abs/1701.05940. arXiv:{1701.05940}.
[31] E. Borson, IEST-STD-CC1246D: product cleanliness levels and contamination
control program, Institute of Environmental Sciences and Technology.
[32] J. Boger, et al., The Sudbury Neutrino Observatory, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A449
(2000) 172–207. arXiv:{nucl-ex/9910016}, doi:{10.1016/S0168-9002(99)
01469-2}.
[33] E. D. Hallman, R. G. Stokstad, Establishing a cleanliness program and specifications for the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory, Tech. Rep. SNO-STR-91-009,
Sudbury Neutrino Observatory, Department of Physics, Stirling Hall, Queen’s
University at Kingston, Kingston, Ontario, Canada K7L 3N6 (1991).
[34] T. A. Barber, Control of particulate matter contamination in healthcare manufacturing, CRC Press, 1999.
[35] M. Leung, Surface contamination from radon progeny, AIP Conf. Proc. 785 (1)
(2005) 184. doi:{10.1063/1.2060470}.
[36] E. O. Knutson, Modeling indoor concentrations of radon decay products, Radon
and its decay products in indoor air (1988) 161–202.
[37] E. S. Morrison, et al., Radon daughter plate-out onto Teflon, AIP Conf. Proc.
1921 (1) (2018) 090002. arXiv:{1708.08534}, doi:{10.1063/1.5019012}.
[38] H. Zou, et al., Quantifying the triboelectric series, Nature Communications
10 (1) (2019) 1427. doi:{10.1038/s41467-019-09461-x}.
[39] Y. Meng, et al., A new method for evaluating the effectiveness of plastic
packaging against radon penetration, Applied Radiation and Isotopes 156
(2020) 108963. arXiv:{1903.02643}, doi:{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apradiso.2019.108963}.

49

[40] D. S. Akerib, et al., The Large Underground Xenon (LUX) experiment, Nucl.
Instrum. Meth. A704 (2013) 111–126. arXiv:{1211.3788}, doi:{10.1016/j.
nima.2012.11.135}.
[41] S. Agostinelli, et al., GEANT4: a simulation toolkit, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A506
(2003) 250–303. doi:{10.1016/S0168-9002(03)01368-8}.
[42] E. Aprile, et al., Lowering the radioactivity of the photomultiplier tubes for
the XENON1T dark matter experiment, Eur. Phys. J. C75 (11) (2015) 546.
arXiv:{1503.07698}, doi:{10.1140/epjc/s10052-015-3657-5}.
[43] D. S. Akerib, et al., Measurement of the gamma ray background in the Davis
cavern at the Sanford Underground Research Facility, Astropart. Phys. 116
(2020) 102391. arXiv:{1904.02112}, doi:{10.1016/j.astropartphys.2019.
102391}.
[44] M. Yeh, et al., Purification of lanthanides for large neutrino detectors: thorium
removal from gadolinium chloride, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A618 (2010) 124–130.
doi:{10.1016/j.nima.2010.02.124}.
[45] P. J. W. Faulkner, et al., GridPP: development of the UK computing grid for
particle physics, J. Phys. G32 (2006) N1–N20. doi:{10.1088/0954-3899/32/
1/N01}.
[46] D. Britton, et al., GridPP: the UK grid for particle physics, Phil. Trans. Roy.
Soc. Lond. A367 (1897) (2009) 2447–2457. doi:{10.1098/rsta.2009.0036}.
Appendix A. Assay Results Tables
In this section, the results from the assay campaign of the LZ experiment are
captured. The tables are split into the various techniques which were used. Table A1
details all assays completed using the HPGe detectors available to the collaboration.
For this table, there are a number of repeat measurements. Where this is the case,
items are grouped with a single entry having multiple results. Each named item in
the table is unique even if it shares the same name as another. Tables A4,A2 and
A3 detail results from NAA, ICP-MS and GD-MS, respectively. Finally, Table A5
details results from the radon emanation assay campaign.
For ease of interpretation, the tables are further subdivided to detail locations
within the LZ experiment where specific items were either used or where there intended use would be. Those items which are constructed “in-house” by the LZ
50

collaboration are highlighted as such. Not all isotopes are detailed for all items as
the ability to do this may depend on the ability of the detector or method employed
or if the isotope is of particular interest (e.g. for 60 Co in stainless steel components).
The upper limits reported are generally at 90% confidence level but upper limits
from the LBNL and BHUC detectors (Merlin, Maeve, Morgan, Mordred, and
SOLO) are quoted at 1σ.

51

FoamOrder

Supra Alloy
PTG
Supra Alloy
PTG
METTEC
METTEC
Timet
Timet
Timet
Ilsenburg
Handi Foam
Titanium Metal Supply Inc.
Titanium Metal Supply Inc.
VSMPO
VSMPO
Timet
Foam Factory
Timet
Nironit
Nironit
Nironit

0.375-in Ti Sheet Stock Grade CP-1
0.3125-in Ti Sheet Stock Grade CP-1
0.375-in Ti Sheet Stock Grade CP-2
0.3125-in Ti Sheet Stock Grade CP-2
Ti alloy bolts 0.5-in x 3.5-in
0.5-in Ti alloy nuts and washers
Ti Sheet Stock
Ti Sheet Stock
Ti Sheet Stock

Gerda D6 Stainless Steel Plate

Polyurethane Foam Sealant
LUX Titanium 3/16
LUX Titanium 3/16
Titanium Sponge
Titanium Wafers
Titanium Plate
Polyethylene Foam
Titanium Sheet

Stainless Steel Sheet

Stainless Steel Sheet

Stainless Steel Sheet

Cryostat

Commercial Supplier

PVC Tubing

Midwest Tungsten
Midwest Tungsten

Supplier

Closed-Cell Polyethylene Foam 1/4-inch

Conduits

Tungsten Pig
Tungsten Alloy

Calibration

Sample

Maeve
Maeve
Maeve
Maeve
Merlin
Merlin
Maeve
Merlin
Maeve
Ge-II
Maeve
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Maeve
Maeve
Maeve
Ge-III
Maeve
Ge-II
Merlin
Ge-III
Merlin
Ge-II
Merlin

Merlin
Merlin
Morgan

Merlin
Merlin

8.5

10

10

0.44
3.6
2.9
1.0
0.53
7.1
0.79
6.9

6.0

5.8
5.4
7.6
6.7
0.99
0.29
6.4
4.3
4.3

0.05

6.0

0.89
0.98

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

mBq/kg
Bq/kg

Units

continued

Detector Mass [kg]

Ue

31(5)
46(7)
110(24)
<9.6
1300(100)
500(100)
4.9(25)
<1.2
11(4)
<1.5
5.7(33)
<49
<11
<6.2
17(9)
62(25)
8.0(19)
57(13)
<8.5
<14
<9.5
<3.8
-

0.27(7)
<309
<290

-

238

Table A1: HPGe Screening Results.
Ul

4.1(6)
2.8(6)
<2.4
3.6(12)
<6.0
<8.4
3.3(5)
<25
<0.60
<1.5
<0.16
<2.5
<1.2
12(1)
<6.2
<0.12
57(13)
<0.37
4.9(10)
1.1(3)
2.5(5)
<0.60
2.2(8)
<0.60

0.16(1)
<138
<42

<1200
1.7(10)

238

The

2.8(8)
0.37(4)
<4.1
<4.1
6.8(12)
<0.9
<5.0
-

0.04(1)
<177
<60

<690
0.15(1)

232

Thl

2.8(4)
2.8(4)
170(4)
2.4(8)
160(20)
80(20)
0.81(41)
<4.1
<0.60
<1.1
<0.30
<41
<1.6
<1.2
<4.1
<4.1
<0.12
<9.0
<0.61
4.9(10)
4.1(5)
0.52(37)
<0.80
<1.0
<0.90

0.04(1)
<107
<36

<610
0.14(1)

232

K

<1.8
<1.8
2.4(3)
<2.1
<60
<60
<1.5
<6.0
<2.4
<13
<0.80
<310
<0.01
<0.01
<6.2
<31
<0.62
<80
<0.53
1.7(36)
<3.0
0.69(183)
<3.0
<2.7
<3.0

0.40(60)
<490
<236

<150
77(5)

40

210

-

-

-

Pb

-

-

Co

8.4(3)
6.2(6)
3.7(2)
<6.0
15(2)
8.2(5)
14(2)
7.4(4)
9.7(13)
6.5(5)

60

Supplier

Nironit
Nironit
Nironit
Nironit
Nironit
Nironit
Nironit
Nironit
Nironit
Nironit
FKM
Timet
Helicoflex
Helicoflex
eFoam UK
eFoam UK
eFoam UK
Barnwell
Oxford Bearings Ltd
RUAG
eFoam UK
Dichtomatik
O-Rings Ltd
Italy #422511

Sample

Stainless Steel Sheet

Stainless Steel Sheet

Stainless Steel Sheet

Stainless Steel Sheet

Stainless Steel Sheet

Stainless Steel Sheet

Stainless Steel Sheet
Stainless Steel Sheet
Stainless Steel Sheet
Stainless Steel Sheet
Viton O-ring
Titanium Sheet
Helicoflex Nimonic Spring
Helicoflex Aluminium/Inconel
Polyamide Foam
Armaflex Foam
Plastazone Foam
Silicone Gasket
Stainless Steel Fasteners
Multi-Layer Insulation
Plastazone Foam
Viton O-Rings
Viton O-Rings
Stainless Steel Cryostat Flange

9.6
11
9.6
9.6
0.30
10
0.37
0.42
0.01
0.10
0.03
0.04
0.69
0.05
0.10
0.27
0.40
9.2

9.5

9.4

9.4

11

10

continued

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

Maeve
Merlin
Maeve
Merlin
Merlin
Maeve
Maeve
Merlin
Merlin
Maeve
Maeve
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Chaloner
Maeve
Chaloner
Lunehead
Lunehead
Lunehead
Lunehead
Lunehead
Lunehead
Lunehead
Lunehead
Lunehead
Lumpsey
Morgan
10

Units

Detector Mass [kg]

Ue

7.3(25)
<1.0
1.2(5)
1.9(11)
0.50(20)
1.4(6)
2630(280)
<1.6
850(78)
443(131)
701(212)
2049(607)
59(30)
1289(362)
<118
159(24)
8.6(12)

238

Ul

0.35(5)
<0.70
0.54(10)
<0.60
<0.60
0.27(5)
0.38(5)
<0.70
<0.50
1.9(1)
0.50(10)
<0.60
4.0(6)
<0.60
<0.80
<1.4
2490(70)
<0.09
16(5)
<4.6
1693(230)
704(36)
333(67)
294(37)
26(2)
3346(457)
446(44)
40(11)
<56
0.32(6)

238

The

1.1(2)
0.49(8)
0.33(4)
0.81(8)
1.7(2)
0.50(6)
220(20)
0.28(3)
27(6)
18(4)
<211
<78
<64
<43
<1.3
<272
146(93)
<37
<49
6.5(4)

232

Thl

4.0(3)
6.3(10)
1.1(2)
<1.3
0.90(20)
0.49(4)
0.73(8)
<0.03
2.0(1)
1.5(1)
0.32(4)
2.1(3)
2.2(3)
4.8(6)
2.1(4)
<1.5
220(20)
0.23(2)
2.0(17)
139(4)
<192
<25
<58
<31
<1.3
<98
133(81)
<33
58(11)
6.5(4)

232

K

<0.80
<3.0
<0.59
<3.0
<4.0
<0.40
<0.46
<3.0
<5.0
<0.50
<0.50
<3.0
<4.0
<2.0
5.0(7)
<4.0
2510(290)
<0.54
84(59)
32(33)
3756(2135)
732(263)
<469
836(350)
<6.0
21(11)
<438
1522(169)
1503(90)
<0.40

40

Pb
3140(170)
226(82)
6914(246)
-

210

Co
14.5(3)
16(1)
1.7(1)
1.7(3)
2.2(3)
1.6(1)
5.6(2)
5.9(4)
1.6(3)
4.5(2)
2.6(1)
2.2(4)
26(1)
32(1)
32(1)
335(3)
10(10)
32(3)
<0.84
<18
<12
10(1)
<9.0
<23
<8.0
<4.0
3.0(1)

60

Italy #422511
Italian
Coulter
Timet
Timet
Nironit
Nironit
Technetics
Technetics
Technetics
RUAG
Loterios
Loterios
Nironit
Nironit
Nironit
Nironit
Timet
Loterios
Loterios
Nironit
Loterios
Nironit
Axon
Technetics
Tube Supply Intl.
Stainless UK Ltd

Stainless Steel Cryostat Flange

Stainless Steel Round Stock

Stainless Steel Plate
3.2 mm Titanium Welding Wire
7 mm Titanium Coupons
5 mm Stainless Steel Plate
5 mm Stainless Steel Plate
Aluminium Plate
Stainless Steel Wire

Inconel 600 Plate For Helicoflex Seal

Multi-Layer Insulation

12 mm Titanium Plate
9 mm Titanium Plate
7.5 mm Stainless Steel Plate
12 mm Stainless Steel Plate
20 mm Stainless Steel Plate
25 mm Stainless Steel Plate
Forged and Machined Weir Ports
1.6 mm Titanium Welding Wire
1.6 mm Titanium Welding Wire
1-inch Stainless Steel Rods
3.2 mm Titanium Welding Wire
50 mm Stainless Steel Plates
Cable For LZ Sensors
Aluminium Sheets
Stainless Steel Tubes
Stainless Steel Threaded Rod

Supplier

Sample
Merlin
Morgan
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
SOLO
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Maeve
Merlin
Merlin
SOLO
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Maeve
Mordred
Merlin
Maeve
Lumpsey
Lumpsey
Lumpsey
8.2
5.0
12
8.6
9.9
9.1
1.6
1.1
1.1
2.1
1.0
9.1
1.7
0.17
0.77
1.0

0.12

0.34

13
0.95
5.0
7.1
7.1
0.32
0.20

3.4

1.0

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

Units

continued

Detector Mass [kg]

Ue

2.5(12)
<0.99
37(12)
<6.2
<123
<25
<3.4
<6.2
1235(247)
1111(247)
115(65)
494(123)
0.99(37)
<123
<7.4
<25
<6.2
<3.7
<12
<12
<37
136(37)
<123
10(5)
<6.2
<12
37(7)
640(110)
90(50)
70(30)

238

Ul

1.9(4)
<0.86
12(1)
<2.5
<12
<12
0.83(54)
<1.2
<12
<123
<2.5
<12
<62
<10
<1.2
<1.2
<1.2
<1.2
<1.2
<1.2
<12
64(5)
37(12)
3.2(6)
85(16)
<1.2
5.0(10)
60(20)
31(13)
<17

238

The

4.9(8)
3.3(4)
3.7(12)
<2.0
<8.1
<4.1
2.1(19)
122(41)
<41
<8.9
<8.1
<15
<4.1
<4.1
<4.1
<4.1
2.0(12)
<2.0
<4.1
<4.1
8.1(41)
10(1)
<6.9
<2.0
<1.4
64(34)
<30
<20

232

Thl

4.9(8)
4.9(4)
3.7(12)
<2.0
<8.1
<4.1
2.3(11)
2.4(4)
102(8)
<41
<5.3
<41
<8.1
<9.0
<4.1
<4.1
<4.1
<4.1
2.0(12)
<2.0
<4.1
<4.1
8.1(41)
9.0(10)
<4.1
<2.0
<2.7
580(30)
<20
<9.0

232

K

<31
<1.0
<31
<31
<31
<31
<2.3
<6.2
2694(93)
<7121
<13
<155
372(248)
<77
<3.1
<31
<3.1
<3.1
<3.1
<15
<31
<31
<31
<1.3
<9.3
<15
39(8)
<240
43(35)

40

Pb
12000(400)
-

210

Co
3.1(3)
6.7(4)
9.0(40)
12.1(4)
1.5(3)
0.40(10)
2.5(10)
0.40(10)
<11
-

60

Supplier
Loterios
McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr
Direct Plastics
Direct Plastics
Dichtomatik
Technetics
Panel Systems
TE Connectivity
Whitney Steelstock
Oxford Bearings Ltd
Stainless UK Ltd
Stainless UK Ltd
Stainless UK Ltd
Astropak
A. G. Layne Inc.
Weld Craft
Solid Spot
Solid Spot
Avesta
GoPrint3D
GoPrint3D
Stainless UK Ltd
Techapps (CuTS brand)
Stainless UK Ltd
Oxford Bearings Ltd
Product Components Corporation

Sample

1.6 mm Titanium Welding Wire
PEEK Rods 3/8 & 1/2
PEEK Rods 1/4
PEEK 1/4 Threaded Rod
UMHW Polyethylene Blocks
High Density Polyethylene Blocks
Viton O-Rings
Helicoflex Seal Aluminium
Styrofoam
MMCX Connectors
Stainless Steel Tubes
Stainless Steel Nuts
Stainless Steel Threaded Rod
Large Stainless Steel Cylinder
Small Stainless Steel Cylinders x4
Deionised Water
IPA 99%
Welding Tips
PEEK Cable Ties
PEEK Cable Ties
Metal Treatment Spray
Black 3D Printed Material
White 3D Printed Material
Stainless Steel Pipe
Thermal Flexible Links
Stainless Steel Threaded Rod
Stainless Steel Nuts
PTFE Screws
Morgan
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Chaloner
Lumpsey
Lunehead
Lunehead
Lunehead
Chaloner
Lumpsey
Lumpsey
Lumpsey
Lumpsey
Lunehead
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Maeve
Merlin
Roseberry
Roseberry
Roseberry
Merlin
Chaloner
Lunehead
Morgan

1.1
0.60
0.23
0.12
1.5
1.3
0.29
0.07
0.35
0.03
0.77
0.44
1.0
3.9
4.7
1.0
1.0
0.15
0.39
0.39
0.60
0.04
0.04
0.57
1.1
2.5
0.73
0.08

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

Units

continued

Detector Mass [kg]

Ue

<6.0
<38
<18
<25
<24
<40
<80
1050(300)
<199
525(85)
1000(550)
<850
<180
<40
<50
<185
<25
<227
<75
<81
<12
15(10)
15(11)
14(7)
<12
<47
<71
<85

238

Ul

<0.80
21(5)
<15
<12
<1.0
<4.0
250(20)
125(30)
130(16)
48(23)
50(20)
60(40)
<25
8.0(40)
8.0(10)
<8.5
<9.0
35(31)
70(18)
45(3)
<10
17(9)
<8.0
4.0(20)
<6.0
<1.0
4.0(20)
<12

238

The

<0.90
<3.2
<9.0
<16
<1.0
<7.0
710(55)
<90
85(24)
<95
<40
<73
<23
<6.0
4.0(10)
<4.1
<4.0
504(66)
80(96)
28(5)
<4.0
35(20)
30(15)
5.0(20)
<8.0
<2.0
4.0(30)
<15

232

Thl

<2.7
<2.9
<6.0
<11
<0.50
<4.0
680(30)
1200(50)
59(14)
12(11)
<50
<61
<20
<5.0
4.0(10)
<4.5
<4.0
323(35)
40(12)
32(4)
<4.0
5.0(30)
20(3)
7.0(10)
<6.0
1.7(40)
3.0(20)
<17

232

K

<4.3
<19
<51
<94
<24
<24
3900(220)
<320
<150
<332
<100
<190
41(33)
<16
<8.0
112(27)
<25
<100
<80
71(18)
2200(90)
1360(150)
<60
12(7)
44(6)
<13
<19
<89

40

Pb
35542(1427)
<12
<12
<128
<19
1060(80)
75(25)
550(80)
<62
-

210

Co
2.0(10)
8.0(10)
11(1)
-

60

Supplier
Product Components Corporation
Palatine Precision Ltd
Dichtomatik
Dichtomatik
Accu-Glass Products Inc
Chemours
Hydro Aluminium Rolled Products
Product Components Corporation
eFoam UK
eFoam UK
Nironit
RUAG
Loterios
Loterios
Genesis Alkali
Nironit
BuyAerogel
GoPrint3D
Oxford Bearings Ltd
RUAG
Timet
Direct Plastics
GoPrint3D
GoPrint3D
McMaster Carr
Loterios
Mouser Electronics
Fralock (McMaster Carr)

Sample

PTFE Screws
Bellows
Viton O-Rings
Elastomer Cord

PEEK Monofilament

Krytox
Aluminium Sheet
PTFE Screws
Styrodur Foam
Polyisocyanurate Foam
20mm Stainless Steel Sheet
Multi-Layer Insulation
Titanium Lathe Swarf
Titanium Drill Swarf
Sodium Bicarbonate
Stainless Steel Plates
AeroGel Thermal Wrap 8 mm
Cream 3D Printed Material
Stainless Steel Fasteners
Aluminium Tape
Titanium Coupons
HDPE Plates
Blue 3D Printed Material
Yellow 3D Printed Material
PTFE Screws & Washers
Welding Wire
Cable Ties
Kapton Tiles

Merlin
Roseberry
Lunehead
Chaloner
Merlin
Chaloner
Roseberry
Chaloner
Merlin
Chaloner
Lunehead
SOLO
Roseberry
Lunehead
Chaloner
Merlin
Merlin
Morgan
Lunehead
Lunehead
Merrybent
Morgan
Chaloner
Chaloner
Merrybent
Merlin
Belmont
SOLO
Morgan
0.07
0.37
0.07
0.22
0.20
9.9
0.66
0.16
0.46
0.39
9.7
0.10
0.03
1.5
0.29
2.0
0.55
0.04
0.03
0.05
0.03
0.06
0.18

0.02

0.08
0.54
0.37
0.35

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

Units

continued

Detector Mass [kg]

Ue

<145
14(7)
171(26)
<19
<1060
1500(500)
<43
293(100)
<154
<33
<150
<7.4
18(8)
<109
7.0(40)
<27
<2.5
<181
<1000
<75
<7.0
<9.7
14(5)
<25
<12
<142
<21
<182
<25

238

Ul

<44
8.0(20)
62(8)
572(20)
<320
1200(500)
46(12)
64(16)
<74
45(20)
<28
0.87(43)
10(3)
<19
8.0(50)
123(25)
<0.70
<25
100(42)
<4.0
40(6)
<1.1
<6.9
<23
150(25)
<80
<37
<13
<4.6

238

The

<52
12(4)
19(7)
1776(45)
<710
<400
14(10)
<20
<141
<28
<44
0.99(75)
<3.0
<21
<5.0
<12
<1.1
<30
186(49)
8.0(30)
20(5)
<2.9
<7.9
<14
<8.0
<70
35(16)
<20
<6.2

232

Thl

<31
15(1)
15(3)
1747(15)
<760
300(100)
11(3)
<13
<138
29(5)
<15
1.5(6)
<1.0
<11
5.0(10)
<11
<0.76
<20
161(16)
8.0(20)
25(2)
<1.6
1.8(10)
<12
<4.0
<55
22(4)
<16
<5.2

232

K

<188
<8.0
3267(105)
7895(172)
<2030
<4400
137(54)
<121
<287
<268
57200(800)
<1.7
50(20)
<121
<43
<39
<3.1
1588(221)
<280
<14
130(23)
<6.8
<36
<160
<74
<209
<81
<84
<32

40

Pb
140(51)
<900
<500
<120
<119
150(30)
29(12)
<14
<25
-

210

Co
10(2)
<3.0
<2.0
<170
<6.0
<5.0
<11
<8.0
<2.0
<6.0
<2.0
<12
13(1)
<2.0
<5.0
350(17)
-

60

BAL-SEAL from BSE-3 SS stock
Smalley
McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr
Protolabs from PolyOne stock
McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr
Kurt J. Lesker
McMaster Carr
Kurt J. Lesker
Kurt J. Lesker
Grainger
Chip Quik
LBNL Fabrication
Lee Spring
Blue Demon
Harris Products via McMaster

Canted Coil Springs

Wave Springs
Xenon Displacer
PEEK Rods 3/8
CHV Insulating Boomerangs
Stainless Steel Bars 1-7/16
Tellurium Copper Bars 1/2
Tellurium Copper Bars 1
3/4 Stainless Steel Adapters
Conflat Flanges
Stainless Steel Swarf
1-1/3 Conflat Blanks
2-1/8 Conflat Half Nipples
Stainless Steel Bars
Solder Paste
Copper Plates
Stainless Steel Spring
Tungsten Welding Electrodes
Stainless Steel Welding Wire

Polyethylene Bead Stock
Polyethylene Bead Stock
Polyethylene Bead Stock

Bay Cable
Bay Cable
Bay Cable

Silicon Valley MFG
Digikey/TE Connectivity
Made in house
Tube Supply Intl.
Tube Supply Intl.
McMaster Carr
NorCal & Penn Stainless

Copper Block
Terminal Ring Connectors
Vacuum RTD Screws
Stainless Steel Tubes
Stainless Steel Tubes
M8 Bolts & Washers
ISO 200-800-OF Flanges & Stainless 304L

High Voltage

Supplier

Sample

Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Maeve
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin

Merlin
Merlin
Roseberry
Lunehead
Lunehead
Morgan
SOLO

0.18
0.30
0.21
0.20
2.6
1.6
1.6
0.27
0.34
0.94
2.7
0.23
1.0
0.19
0.93

0.10

3.4
3.8
4.2

0.35
0.04
0.08
0.92
1.5
0.59
2.3

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/Unit
mBq/Unit
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/Unit
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

Units

continued

Detector Mass [kg]

Ue

1.3(31)
6.6(27)
6.0(30)
<120
<308
1482(942)
<35
<56
<116
<10
<7.4
<7.4
<49
<49
<15
<1.6
<7.2
<12
<55
<12
<3.1
<124
<29

<24
<343
58(14)
<25
40(20)
<27
<14

238

Ul

3.4(5)
<0.40
<0.37
54(15)
182(56)
107(20)
<3.3
<7.0
20(14)
<4.3
<3.7
<3.7
<18
<13
<6.0
<0.40
<1.8
<4.9
<18
<5.0
<1.2
<22
<7.0

<8.6
<120
29(6)
<4.0
<3.0
<3.5
4.6(10)

238

The

<0.30
0.55(23)
0.63(24)
43(22)
171(73)
<14
<6.6
<10
<11
6.0(50)
<5.7
<5.7
<26
<15
<11
<0.60
<2.8
<4.1
<18
<5.0
<1.9
<39
<7.0

<9.3
<110
6.0(40)
<4.0
<4.0
<5.0
<6.1

232

Thl

<0.49
<0.55
<0.62
<16
<18
<11
<3.8
<6.0
<10
9.3(20)
<4.9
<4.9
<19
<18
<9.0
0.70(60)
3.3(30)
<4.9
<16
<4.0
<1.7
56(36)
15(14)

<8.5
<121
14(3)
<3.0
<5.0
<4.1
5.4(18)

232

K

5.3(31)
3.0(28)
3.4(28)
<130
<163
<74
<36
<65
<56
<16
<22
<22
<67
<56
<28
<1.7
<7.5
<16
<70
<19
<4.9
<108
<31

<28
<359
30(18)
<18
<17
<19
<14

40

-

Pb

<95
<62
<43
-

210

Co

7.2(11)
0.30(20)
1.5(9)
5.0(20)
-

18(4)
172(3)
15(1)
6.5(34)
15(2)

60

Ge-II
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Lunehead
Ge-III
Lunehead
Chaloner
Chaloner
Lumpsey
Maeve

N/A
N/A
N/A
Alconox
Alconox
McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr
N/A
N/A
Imperial College London Fabrication
Imperial College London Fabrication
Carboact
MINCO

HEPA Dust (unvented)

HEPA Dust (vented)
Isopropyl Alchohol
Acetone
Carboact Activated Charcoal
Thermofoil Heaters

Chaloner

Morgan
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
SOLO
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin

0.86
0.90
1.0
0.01
0.04

0.86

1.8
0.88
0.38
0.27

0.39

0.39

0.06

0.29

0.32
0.30
0.49
0.63
1.4
1.6
0.07
0.46
0.04
0.26
0.06

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
Bq/kg
Bq/kg
Bq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

Bq/kg

Bq/kg

Bq/kg

mBq/kg

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/Unit
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/Unit
mBq/Unit
mBq/kg
mBq/Unit
mBq/kg

Units

continued

Detector Mass [kg]

Deionised Water
Environmental Dust From 4850L SURF
Cleanroom
Environmental Dust From 4850L SURF
Cleanroom (vented)
Environmental Dust From 4850L SURF
Cleanroom (un-vented)
Alconox Detegent-8
Alconox Powdered Detergent
Rope
High Voltage Cables

Amazon UK

McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr
Quadrant From Boedeker Stock
McMaster Carr
Quadrant From Boedeker Stock
Shapeways.com
Ohmite
Kurt J. Lesker
Vendor Supplied SS 304
Vendor Supplied SS 304
McMaster Carr

Stainless Steel Mount
Pure and Ceriated Tungsten Welding Electrodes
Stainless Steel Welding Wire
PEEK Cylinder 2-1/2 Diameter
FEP Compression To Conflat Adaptor
Cold Grading Structure Mount
Black TIVAR Discs
Copper Desoldering Braid
CHV Cables
3D Printed Brass Connectors
Grading Resistors
Bellows
Bellows Clamp Collar
Clamp Collar Split Ring
Stainless Steel Set Screws

Misc

Supplier

Sample

Ue

247(37)
543(247)
309(123)
49(25)
16(11)
<30
21(11)
<7.0
<7.0
<280
<227

12.59(4)

17.53(6)

11(2)

<5.6

<19
<52
<28
<34
<64
<148
<18
<93
<34
<247
2.2(6)
<16
<106
<11
<154

238

Ul

<12
222(25)
62(12)
235(49)
11(2)
<4.8
9.0(20)
<3.0
<3.0
<130
457(49)

12.10(1)

15.09(2)

10(1)

<9.0

<3.6
156(35)
<12
<17
<3.0
<4.9
<6.2
<32
56(15)
<89
0.50(10)
<3.1
<33
<3.4
<33

238

The

<4.1
61(24)
<20
8.0(30)
7.4(23)
6.0(30)
<4.0
<5.0
<240
<27

7.68(1)

9.63(2)

4.4(4)

<7.8

<6.0
506(107)
<13
<17
89(9)
<8.9
<3.0
<55
<21
<89
0.20(20)
<5.6
<37
<5.4
<35

232

Thl

<4.1
138(20)
<20
285(41)
3.0(10)
11(2)
5.0(10)
<2.0
<2.0
<130
<17

7.68(1)

9.63(2)

4.4(4)

<3.4

<4.1
303(34)
34(15)
<13
101(6)
<7.3
<2.4
<44
16(17)
<97
0.30(10)
<5.1
<26
<4.2
<40

232

K

1115(62)
21672(310)
<310
402(155)
177(14)
187(30)
172(13)
<35
<37
<460
<68

197(1)

251(3)

156(23)

<67

<20
<102
<36
<45
<10
<22
<22
<142
<34
<368
<0.30
<17
<100
<17
392(538)

40

Pb

1119(175)
974(152)
<22
35(31)
<480
-

-

-

-

<16

<432
-

210

Co

<1.0
<1.0
-

-

-

-

-

24(7)
6.5(15)
-

60

City Special Metals
N/A
Imperial College London Fabrication
Alconox
Imperial College London Fabrication
Imperial College London Fabrication
Powder Technology
Powder Technology
Powder Technology
Powder Technology
AstroPak
Lincoln Plastics
P&G
Malin
MMC
PENN STAINLESS
American Boa

OFHC Copper
Deionised Water From SURF Faucet
Superwash 2000
Citranox
Deionised Water
Deionised Water
A4 Coarse Dust
A1 Ultrafine Dust
AFRL-02 Dust
AFRL-03 Dust
Isopropyl Alchohol
MMC Black Rubber
DAWN Ultra Washing Up Liquid
Mixed Stainless Steel Hardware
Mixed Stainless Steel Hardware
Stainless Steel Offcuts
Stainless Steel Bellows Material

Reynolds Polymer Technology
Ventura Steel
Endure Braid
McMaster Carr
3M
Reynolds
Reynolds
Reynolds
TORAY(Japan)
Microgrit
Sigma-Aldrich
Sigma-Aldrich

Adhesive Epoxy
Stainless Steel Unistrut
Rope
Stainless Steel 1/4-20 Nuts
Polishing Compound (Finesse-It)
Sandpaper 5-inch
Sandpaper 7-inch
Gemac Film
Lumirror Reflector
Microgrit Aluminum Oxide
GdLS Exposed To Mine Air

GdCl (Gadolinium Chloride)

Outer Detector

Supplier

Sample

Ge-III
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Ge-II
Ge-II
Ge-II
Ge-II
LBNL
Ge-II
Morgan
Mordred
Merlin

Merlin
Roseberry
Chaloner
Chaloner
Chaloner
Chaloner
Ge-II
Ge-II
Ge-II
Ge-II
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
SOLO
Mordred

0.31

0.08
1.0
0.42
0.52
0.59
0.04
0.13
1.1
0.69
0.68
0.69

2.3
1.2
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.2
0.12
0.10
0.30
0.32
0.52
0.41
0.63
0.20
0.92
0.40
0.21

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
Bq/kg
Bq/kg
Bq/kg
Bq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

Units

continued

Detector Mass [kg]

Ue

<640
<1.0
86(12)
<12
<329
15(2)
4.5(7)
405(99)
<133
11(2)
<12
<7.4
<12

<15
2.0(10)
<7.0
<6.0
<6.0
<5.0
<28
<993
3.0(21)
<98
<17
<62
<74

238

Ul

123(41)
<1.0
86(12)
<12
<39
13(1)
4.3(5)
187(22)
1708(32)
5.0(5)
58(1)
21(2)
25(13)

<11
3.0(10)
<2.0
3.0(20)
3.0(20)
<3.0
29.1(4)
47(1)
4.9(1)
6.6(1)
<26
1616(105)
<0.5
137(80)
<9.2
<10
<12

238

The

<35
<1.0
<20
<8.1
<29
19(2)
8.7(8)
303(34)
<55
7.6(7)
2.4(8)
<3.3
<4.0

<10
2.0(10)
<3.0
<4.0
<3.0
<3.0
<14
<49
<0.9
<36
<7.5
<17
<20

232

Thl

<35
<1.0
<20
<8.1
<1.9
17(1)
8.1(7)
289(28)
58(17)
7.0(6)
<1.6
<1.2
<4.0

<8.0
1.1(20)
2.0(10)
<2.0
<2.0
<2.0
<11
152(86)
<0.5
<41
<8.0
<11
<15

232

K

99(158)
300(200)
712(31)
<93
<198
11(2)
9.9(15)
936(156)
329(106)
5.6(9)
<9.3
<28
<31

<28
9.0(60)
1280(40)
147(25)
<25
<27
<47
1607(526)
2080(91)
<134
<25
<65
<59

40

Pb

-

<11
19(6)
<18
<18
<16
<31
<198
<25
-

210

Co

<9.0
-

2.7(19)
-

60

Super ESKA
Alconox
UCSB Fabrication
Reynolds
UCSB Fabrication
Brulin
University of Liverpool Fabrication
Super ESKA
Super ESKA
Super ESKA
Super ESKA
iPolymer
Pure Blue USA
iPolymer
McMaster Carr
Foam Factory
Foam Factory
LZ Fabrication
University of Liverpool Fabrication
Reynolds

Fiberoptic Cable
Alconox Detegent-8
Deionized Water
Bonding Syrup
Machining Water
Aquavantage 1990 GD / BRULIN 1900 GD
Fiberoptic Cable Mounts
Fibreoptic Cable
Fibreoptic Cable
Fibreoptic Cable
Fibreoptic Cable
PTFE Tubing
PTFE Tubing
PTFE Cylinder
FEP Tube 5/8 ID & 3/4 OD
Cross-Linked Polyethylene Sheet
Cross-Linked Polyethylene Sheet
SS303 Inserts
OCS Fibre Supports
OD Acrylic Powder

Farnell
Farnell
Hamamatsu
Cirlex
ELSOLD
Farnell
Farnell
Farnell
Farnell

Capacitors KEMET 10 nF - 0603

Resistors BOURNS 4.99M - 0805
Hamamatsu 10-inch PMT Glass
Cirlex Sheets
SnCu 0.7 flux 3064 2.2%
Capacitors AVX 10 nF - 0805
Capacitors Yageo 10 nF - 0805
Resistors VISHAY 4.99M - 0805
Resistors Welwyn 10M - 0805

PMTs, PMT bases and their components

Supplier

Sample

Lunehead
Chaloner
Chaloner
Merlin
Chaloner
Lunehead
Lunehead
Chaloner
Chaloner
Chaloner

Lumpsey
Chaloner
Chaloner
Chaloner
Chaloner
Merlin
Lumpsey
Lunehead
Lunehead
Lunehead
Lunehead
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Morgan
Belmont
Lunehead
Lunehead

0.02
1.0
0.99
0.26
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.01

0.02

0.94
0.32
0.88
0.41
0.82
1.0
0.82
0.82
0.82
0.82
0.70
0.64
1.1
0.77
0.09
0.09
0.01
1.9
1.4

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/Unit
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

Units

continued

Detector Mass [kg]

Ue

5030(1190)
4050(350)
2070(260)
1506(49)
24(4)
<58
<320
<370
1166(86)
2420(157)

<74
<15
8.0(110)
12(21)
7.0(90)
57(53)
<75
140(50)
84(30)
84(27)
58(30)
<18
<335
<26
<31
<177
<132
1400(300)
31(16)
<186

238

Ul

12130(140)
11300(150)
1340(40)
1506(49)
19(2)
<12
39650(360)
86180(710)
369(39)
414(49)

22(6)
<5.0
2.0(40)
11(8)
3.0(40)
7.0(60)
12(3)
9.0(30)
7.0(30)
7.0(30)
9.0(30)
<7.0
<10
<6.0
<9.0
<72
<23
1700(210)
<2.7
8.1(190)

238

The

4180(80)
3890(80)
860(30)
262(6)
3.2(15)
<11
1780(70)
1770(100)
227(28)
226(36)

14(12)
<7.0
<2.0
13(11)
5.0(50)
39(28)
<9.0
8.0(50)
10(6)
9.0(50)
15(6)
<10
<14
<11
<11
<107
<33
<120
6.1(21)
<3.1

232

Thl

4180(80)
3890(80)
860(30)
1065(24)
3.2(15)
<11
1780(70)
1770(100)
227(28)
226(36)

13(6)
<2.0
6.0(20)
6.0(30)
3.0(20)
7.0(140)
<5.0
5.0(30)
<3.0
<5.0
5.0(30)
<6.0
21(19)
<9.0
<10
<77
<19
70(20)
<2.6
<2.6

232

K

400(340)
300(300)
1360(270)
3901(124)
<15
<32
1000(370)
<290
4358(545)
987(456)

411(28)
86000(1300)
21(31)
510(70)
100(30)
106378(403)
<20
293(34)
303(35)
230(30)
384(33)
<31
<48
<26
167(50)
<302
<147
660(520)
330(20)
38(11)

40

Pb

11590(940)
22940(400)
25(7)
<1170
39787(763)
21613(544)

<210
<46
<11
<18
<9.0
<11
-

210

Co

<10
<10
<10
<0.63
<2.2
<40
<10
<9.3
<12

<1.5
<2.0
<0.50
4.0(30)
<0.70
<1.0
<2.0
<1.0
<1.0
<3.0
<110
<0.50
<0.60

60

Supplier
Farnell
TE Connectivity
Mill-Max
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
Mill-Max
Harwin
KEMET
Multicomp
VISHAY
Harwin
Harwin
Harwin
Harwin
Harwin
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu

Sample

Resistors VISHAY 7M5 - 0805
PMT Pin Receptacles
Receptacles For PMT HV
R11410-20 Insulator Plate (2013)
R11410-20 Metal Bulb (2013)
R11410-20 Sapphire (2013)
R11410-20 Quartz Faceplate (2013)
R11410-20 Aluminum Ring 99.85% (2013)
R11410-20 Aluminum Ring (2013)
R11410-20 Faceplate Flange (2013)
R11410-20 Shield Plate (2013)
R11410-20 Electrode Disk (2013)
R11410-20 Dynodes (2013)
R11410-20 Ceramic Stem (2013)
Gold Plated Pins
Receptacles
Capacitors 3uF
Resistors 5M1
Resistors 0805 4M99
CuBeNi2 Foil
Receptacles 0.8 mm
Receptacles 0.8 mm
Receptacles 1.0 mm
Receptacles 1.0 mm
R11410-20 Ceramic Stem (2015)
R11410-20 Metal Bulb (2015)
R11410-20 Metal Bulb (2015)
R11410-20 Dynode (2015)
R11410-20 Shield Plate (2015)

Chaloner
Lunehead
Chaloner
SOLO
SOLO
SOLO
SOLO
SOLO
SOLO
SOLO
SOLO
SOLO
SOLO
SOLO
Lunehead
Chaloner
Lunehead
Chaloner
Chaloner
Chaloner
Chaloner
Chaloner
Chaloner
Chaloner
Chaloner
SOLO
Maeve
SOLO
SOLO

0.01
0.21
0.02
0.21
0.20
0.09
0.21
0.24
0.24
0.20
0.20
0.20
0.21
0.25
0.01
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.05
0.38
0.07
0.14
0.12
0.76
0.51
0.51
0.53
0.52

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

Units

continued

Detector Mass [kg]

Ue

1097(102)
1706(770)
1252(220)
<306
<389
<107
<150
<150
<111
<70
<109
<89
<350
<1015
589(112)
7008(2810)
4142(1379)
965(76)
4578(309)
833(73)
1178(177)
389(86)
568(75)
105(8)
<190
<18
<216
<77

238

Ul

389(47)
<15
<24
<10
<7.7
34(3)
<1.3
25(2)
<1.5
<1.6
<12
<2.4
<1.4
16(3)
98(42)
<18
11638(606)
2747(204)
284(41)
38(12)
7.0(20)
<6.9
24(5)
21(4)
20(2)
<2.9
<0.90
<2.0
<5.1

238

The

106(22)
<21
<17
<16
<10
<4.0
<8.3
<8.3
<2.4
<2.8
4.9(18)
<2.8
11(4)
<39
16(14)
4126(593)
2216(247)
240(41)
50(14)
13(3)
22(11)
12(4)
17(6)
7.8(18)
<5.5
<1.7
<4.1
<5.0

232

Thl

106(22)
<21
<17
<16
<10
14(3)
<4.0
200(8)
<8.3
<2.4
<2.8
4.9(18)
<2.8
11(4)
<39
3.3(37)
1587(218)
1035(84)
172(31)
75(11)
15(2)
15(5)
9.1(27)
8.0(30)
7.5(11)
13(5)
<1.3
<3.4
<3.2

232

K

3082(608)
159(240)
<107
<104
<72
<24
<9.3
<55
13(3)
<16
<1.8
15(2)
<11
89(13)
353(401)
172(124)
<1923
1027(1358)
3249(477)
131(126)
77(25)
110(87)
63(49)
<19
123(20)
<15
<6.4
<4.6
<6.0

40

Pb
41600(830)
34971(1283)
21664(715)
39943(1639)
35475(597)
1364(467)
21171(524)
22393(741)
23677(661)
29112(603)
5.6(81)
-

210

Co
<16
<5.1
18(8)
<2.1
8.3(11)
<0.75
4.9(12)
<1.1
<10
<6.9
<104
<139
<18
<6.6
<2.0
4.0(20)
<1.0
4.0(10)
4.6(15)

60

Supplier
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
VISHAY
VISHAY
VISHAY
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
Circuit Works
Various Suppliers
Various Suppliers
Gore
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
LZ Fabrication
Hamamatsu
Imperial College London Fabrication
McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr
Imperial College London Fabrication
Photonic Cleaning
Abbott Ball
McMaster Carr

Sample

R11410-20 Faceplate (2015)
R11410-20 Insulator Plate (2015)
R11410-20 Electrode Disk (2015)
R11410-20 Faceplate Flange (2015)
R11410-20 Ceramic Stem (2015)
R11410-20 Stem Flange (2015)
Resistors 0805 100k
Resistors 0805 2M49
Resistors 0805 49.9R
R11410-20 Aluminum Ring (2015)
R11410-20 Getter (2015)
Hamamatsu 3-inch PMT
Hamamatsu 3-inch PMT
Flux For PMT bases
General Routing Material
Router Back Material
Gore PMT Cable
Hamamatsu Washing Powder
Hamamatsu Water
3-inch PMT Bases

Co-Free Kovar

3-Inch PMT Bases
Stainless Steel Rods
Stainless Steel Rods
1-inch PMT Bases
First Contact Polymer
Stainless Steel Sheet
PEEK Plates

Maeve
Maeve
SOLO
SOLO
SOLO
SOLO
Chaloner
Chaloner
Chaloner
SOLO
SOLO
Maeve
Maeve
Lumpsey
Lunehead
Lunehead
Lunehead
Merlin
Merlin
Lunehead
Merlin
Maeve
Morgan
Merlin
Morgan
Lunehead
Chaloner
Merlin
Merlin
1.0
1.1
0.13
0.27
2.0

0.51

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/Unit
mBq/Unit
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/Unit
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/Unit
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/Unit
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

Units

continued

1.2
0.84
0.52
0.53
0.76
1.6
0.003
0.004
0.004
0.51
0.01
0.03
0.10
0.19
0.28
0.51
2.0
-

Detector Mass [kg]

Ue

<11
<21
<203
<162
247(175)
<198
3460(317)
1787(282)
3430(475)
<2508
<24
<18
<140
2008(535)
<225
<262
173(74)
<12
1.9(7)
74(25)
<24
1.6(5)
<37
<25
1.9(7)
<140
<62
<19

238

Ul

<0.67
<1.0
9.5(36)
<2.8
20(4)
<0.63
1036(107)
571(73)
670(98)
<1.2
<39
<2.0
<1.5
<240
99(10)
93(5)
22(5)
173(12)
<12
0.39(5)
<12
<2.5
0.45(6)
25(5)
<22
0.39(5)
<40
27(18)
4.0(20)

238

The

<1.0
<1.6
<4.3
<3.8
18(5)
<2.3
510(209)
645(168)
314(184)
<2.3
<133
<2.1
<2.3
<240
23(16)
75(7)
<11
110(16)
<2.0
0.20(5)
<4.1
<6.9
0.19(3)
<8.1
6.0(20)
0.20(5)
<70
<17
<2.0

232

Thl

<0.80
<1.2
14(4)
<4.2
11(4)
<0.84
144(70)
150(53)
264(77)
<0.94
<102
2.5(4)
<1.5
<150
20(9)
97(5)
<18
110(16)
<2.0
0.17(2)
<4.1
<2.8
0.18(2)
12(4)
4.0(10)
0.17(2)
<20
<12
3.0(80)

232

K

<4.0
<6.3
<9.6
<14
96(21)
<3.3
6118(1724)
7069(1344)
5425(1672)
<8.5
<173
<9.1
24(5)
<375
<153
19810(222)
<77
370(123)
<74
0.26(20)
<31
<22
<0.20
<124
<5.0
<2.5
<540
<70
<15

40

Pb
97516(2157)
52702(1292)
61140(1914)
<350
-

210

Co
8.5(21)
13(3)
12(2)
<169
<65
<29
<0.34
<9.4
1.0(6)
1.6(4)
<2.6
9.5(26)
<0.005
<1.0
<0.01
9.7(8)
-

60

Merlin

McMaster Carr

LZ Calibration LEDs
Stainless Steel 10/32 NF X 5/16 Nuts
ELSOLD SnCu 0.7 flux 3064 2.2%
R11410-20 - Ceramic Stem Body (2018)
R11410-20 Kovar Sheet Stem Flange (2018)
R11410-20 - Silver Brazing Plate (2018)
R11410-20 - Silver Brazing Wire (2018)
Stainless Steel Fasteners
Lead Free Solder
Loop Antennae

PEEK Cable Ties

Merlin

McMaster Carr

Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Solid Spot
Maeve
Everlight
Morgan
McMaster Carr
Merlin
ELSOLD
Chaloner
Hamamatsu
Morgan
Hamamatsu
SOLO
Hamamatsu
Mordred
Hamamatsu
Morgan
McMaster Carr
Merlin
Institute for Basic Science Fabrication Merlin
University of Oxford Fabrication
Morgan

McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr

Merlin
Merlin
Morgan
Maeve
Morgan
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Maeve
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin

McMaster Carr
RediVac
Craftech
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr

PEEK Fasteners
Set Screws
Teflon Screws
Kovar KV-2
Co-Free Kovar YFE42
Perimeter Trifoil Bolts HHCS #10-32 .75
Trifoil Washers
PTFE Nuts, Bolts & Washers
PTFE Nuts, Bolts & Washers
Perimeter Trifoil Washers For #10 Screw
Perimeter Trifoil Nuts #10-32
PEEK Key Handle Nuts #10-32 Narrow Nuts
PEEK Key Handle Bolt #10-32 .75 Pan Handle
(Philips-Head)
PEEK Key Handle Bolt #10-32 .75 Pan Handle
(Philips-Head)
PEEK Key Handle Nuts #10-32 Narrow Nuts
PEEK Key Handle Nuts #10-32 Narrow Nuts
PEEK Key Handle Nuts #10-32 Narrow Nuts
PEEK Key Handle Nuts #10-32 Narrow Nuts

0.01
0.16
0.26
1.6
3.4
0.30
0.34
2.7
0.25
-

0.41

0.05
0.16
-

-

0.33

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/Unit
mBq/Unit
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/Unit

mBq/Unit

mBq/kg

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/Unit
mBq/Unit
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/Unit
mBq/Unit
mBq/kg

Units

continued

0.48
0.07
0.94
0.58
0.51
0.09
0.09
0.004

Detector Mass [kg]

Supplier

Sample

Ue

<185
<125
<0.10
<0.14
<37
<32
<260
<125
77(30)
<37
<126
<105
<4.2
<81
<6.2

<0.16

<49

<19
<388
<18
<36
<48
<0.08
0.003(2)
<99
<46
<0.04
<0.04
16223(8277)

238

Ul

<62
<25
<0.02
<0.04
25(21)
34(6)
<123
<25
15(1)
2.5(12)
<11
<5.6
<2.5
<23
<0.30

<0.05

<16

17(8)
<19
3.9(13)
7.0(20)
<2.2
<0.03
<0.003
<31
<21
<0.01
<0.01
6354(1553)

238

The

<85
<33
<0.03
<0.06
<23
24(6)
<348
<33
12(1)
<3.1
<18
<5.0
<2.5
<28
0.80(30)

<0.07

<20

<10
<24
2.9(16)
<7.4
<4.2
<0.03
0.0004(6)
<37
<23
<0.01
<0.01
16612(7832)

232

Thl

<87
<31
<0.03
<0.06
27(10)
33(5)
<335
<31
5.0(13)
<3.0
<17
<4.2
<3.0
<24
0.60(30)

<0.05

<16

<6.0
<10
9.8(33)
<3.1
<2.2
<0.03
0.0005(4)
<33
<8.0
<0.01
<0.01
14210(1805)

232

K

<277
<106
<0.08
<0.20
107(68)
73(31)
<376
<106
55(8)
<5.0
<155
<22
<6.3
<83
<2.3

<0.23

<71

<45
<186
839(24)
<15
64(18)
<0.19
<0.002
<236
<52
<0.10
<0.08
<9460

40

-

-

-

Pb

<350
10208(912)
-

210

-

-

-

Co

57(4)
5.3(7)
-

60

University of Oxford Fabrication
Gore
Axon
Axon
Axon
MG Chemicals
Brown University Fabrication
Axon
Harwin
Harwin
koax24
Fralock

Semi-Rigid Cabling
PMT Cable (2015)
FEP Pellets
Central Copper Conductor Wire
Ground Braid Copper Wire
Lead Free Solder
OFHC Copper Cable Clips
PMT Signal Cable

Cable Pins - Ground Pins

Signal/HV Pins

RG196 A/U Cable

Cirlex PCBs

PMT Cabling
Chaloner
SOLO
Morgan
Maeve
Maeve
Maeve
Morgan
Maeve
Merlin
Maeve
Merlin
Morgan
Morgan
Merlin
Maeve

SOLO
Morgan
Merlin

Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Roseberry
Roseberry
Roseberry
Roseberry
Roseberry
Roseberry
Mordred
Morgan

All-States
iPolymer

MMC
Solid Spot
McMaster Carr
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu
McMaster Carr
All-States

PTFE Screws
PEEK Nuts and Washers
PEEK Hex Nuts
1-inch PMT Batch 1
1-inch PMT Batch 2
1-inch PMT Batch 3
1-inch PMT Batch 4
1-inch PMT Batch 5
1-inch PMT Batch 6
PMT Top Array Cable Strain Relief Screws
High Density Polyethylene Blocks
Cable Ties For Top PMT Array Cable Strain
Relief
High Density Polyethylene Blanks
PTFE Connectors

0.42

1.7

0.08

0.10

0.26
0.81
0.97
1.1
0.69
0.07
1.1

0.33

0.16

0.06
0.53
0.01
0.29
-

mBq/Unit
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

mBq/Unit
mBq/kg

mBq/kg

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/Unit
mBq/Unit
mBq/Unit
mBq/Unit
mBq/Unit
mBq/Unit
mBq/kg
mBq/Unit

Units

continued

Detector Mass [kg]

All-States

Supplier

Sample

Ue

<6.0
<516
<2.7
<1.0
<10
66(30)
<207
<2.0
<473
<86
<123
<72
28(23)
<112
<35

<5.5
<40

<68

<194
<45
12000(5000)
0.34(11)
0.16(6)
0.33(9)
0.44(13)
0.50(13)
0.33(12)
<39
<5.5

238

Ul

<8.1
<13
<0.90
1.1(5)
9.0(10)
29(2)
<14
3.9(13)
<16
185(12)
153(29)
<15
<1.2
<4.6
18(4)

<0.90
<9.0

<11

<83
<10
9000(700)
<0.12
<0.08
<0.12
<0.14
<0.18
<0.16
<4.9
<0.90

238

The

<16
<16
<0.80
1.5(9)
<1.8
2.8(19)
41(26)
<1.4
<33
<10
<82
25(17)
2.7(10)
<1.6
<4.9

<1.0
<13

<11

<100
<12
6200(1000)
<0.06
<0.05
<0.07
0.06(4)
<0.09
<0.15
<10
<1.0

232

Thl

<4.8
<18
<0.90
0.31(48)
<0.70
3.4(27)
21(22)
<0.60
<42
12(10)
<48
<5.0
<0.80
<2.0
16(8)

<1.0
<13

<13

134(117)
37(17)
8200(700)
0.08(2)
0.05(1)
0.06(1)
0.08(2)
0.11(2)
0.08(2)
<8.9
<1.0

232

K

58(104)
<52
<24
10(6)
<4.5
<11
84(87)
<9.0
<210
<62
<125
113(75)
17(10)
<7.3
<16

<5.2
1094(84)

68(48)

<306
<49
13000(5000)
6.4(5)
6.5(4)
7.2(5)
6.6(5)
6.0(5)
7.2(6)
<78
<5.2

40

Pb

161(42)
<4100
<10
-

-

-

<0.60
0.90(20)
1.7(3)
1.7(4)
1.0(3)
1.9(4)
-

210

Co

<4.8
23(5)
-

-

-

0.30(3)
0.33(2)
0.32(3)
0.30(3)
0.29(3)
0.33(3)
-

60

Axon
Axon
Axon
Axon
Axon
Axon
McMaster Carr

LZ PMT Cable Offcuts (1)
LZ PMT Cable Offcuts (2)
LZ PMT Cable Offcuts (3)
LZ PMT Cable Offcuts (4)
FEP Pellets
LZ PMT Cable Offcuts (all)
AWG-6 Heat Shrink

Gore
Timet (LZ Stock)
Apogee Imaging Systems
Ohmite
Ohmite
Ohmite
Harris
Edmund Optcs
Omega
Victrex
City Special Metals
Hamamatsu
MAES
Heraeus
IST
RS Components
Ohmite
Molex
Measurement Specialties
DuPont

TPC High Voltage Cable

Titanium Field Shaping Ring

TPC Digital Camera
Resistor - MC104825007JE
Resistor - MC102822007FE
Resistor - MOX93021007GTE
Resistor - V3902AOS
Compact Telecentric Lens (40 mm)
PT100
PEEK
Copper
R11410-20 - Cr2O3 (2015)
Acoustic Sensors
PT100
PT100
Ceramic Acoustic Sensors
Resistors SLIM-MOX10803
MMCX Connectors
PVDF Sensor
PTFE Powder

TPC

Supplier

Sample

Merlin
Merlin
Maeve
Ge-III
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Ge-III
Lunehead
Lunehead
Lunehead
Chaloner
Chaloner
Chaloner
Chaloner
Chaloner
Merlin
Chaloner
Chaloner
Lunehead

Chaloner
Chaloner
Chaloner
Chaloner
Roseberry
Belmont
Morgan

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/unit
mBq/kg

mBq/m
mBq/m
mBq/m
mBq/m
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

Units

continued

1.4
0.18
0.10
0.08
0.19
0.03
0.002
1.3
0.85
0.10
0.02
0.02
0.002
0.03
0.33
0.06
1.4

2.4

1.3

0.67
0.34
0.21

Detector Mass [kg]

Ue

<2.4
<2.5
<6.1
11247(1566)
6667(247)
1605(370)
8642(1235)
617(247)
27276(5066)
4038(1095)
17(17)
<14
<22
1710(787)
1581(674)
<20
1852(25)
2034(389)
<700
<37

<0.15
<0.21
<0.22
<0.12
<0.50
<1.0
<67

238

Ul

<2.4
<2.5
22(1)
1392(141)
1605(123)
494(123)
2099(1235)
247(37)
1570(174)
3433(307)
17(2)
<1.7
178(12)
595(68)
4107(387)
5325(426)
602(39)
556(37)
<30
<81
4.0(10)

<0.15
<0.20
<0.20
<0.10
6.6(90)
13(3)
<7.8

238

The

1672(169)
1098(81)
160(20)
970(40)
30(10)
1272(140)
1439(387)
16(3)
<1.3
<9.0
2179(122)
1500(372)
5006(459)
864(54)
374(24)
<26
<52
<3.0

<0.10
<0.15
<0.12
<0.10
<0.80
<2.6
<10

232

Thl

<2.0
<1.6
<1.2
1672(169)
1098(81)
650(81)
3943(163)
122(41)
1272(140)
1042(240)
8.5(22)
<1.2
<7.5
1951(91)
1949(297)
5065(339)
488(34)
374(24)
<25
<50
<3.0

<0.03
<0.04
<0.04
<0.05
0.40(10)
<0.50
<9.9

232

K

Pb
<0.25
<0.58
<0.45
<0.36
<2.6
-

210

<15
<12
<9.5
2533(281)
1393(248)
1022(31)
396.3(3)
<186
1372(354)
156416(5925)
48(21)
<7.0
<61
539(178)
1389(585)
1962(251)
83168(6335)
8439(1265)
15449(3633) 707129(7862)
142(236)
48189(647)
867(93)
<222
255340(8412)
<340
<13
-

<1.2
<0.98
<0.91
<0.59
6.6(3)
<27
147(66)

40

Co

<196
<0.52
<0.40
15(8)
<13
25(10)
<0.60

<0.06
<0.06
<0.04
0.03(1)
<0.30
<2.5
-

60

McMaster Carr
City Special Metals
Riedon

Hexapod Copper
Grading Resistors

Bowlin
J&M
City Special Metals
UC Santa Barbara Fabrication
Axon
Axon

Stainless Steel Fasteners
Stainless Steel Fasteners
Copper Tubes
PTFE Tubing
TPC Grid Cable
TPC Grid Cable

Grading Resistor Nuts

McMaster Carr

Stainless Steel Fasteners

Newark/TE Connectivity

Ohmite
Loctite
California Fine Wire
McMaster Carr

HV Resistors
2-Part Epoxy
Stainless Steel Grid Wire
Stainless Steel 316 Screws

RAL Space Fabrication
City Special Metals
Essentra
Ohmite

Quadrant From Boedeker Stock

Tivar 1000 ESD

Small Titanium Pieces
Copper For Acoustic Sensors
PEEK Fasteners
Ceramic Resictors

Boedeker Plastics Inc
TECAPEEK
Boedeker Plastics Inc
American Elements
Taimei
Mill-Max

PEEK Stock Material
PEEK For TPC
PEEK Flat Stock Material
Silicon Dioxide Powder
Synthetic Alumina Powder
Pin Connectors

Grading Resistor Lugs

Supplier

Sample
Merlin
Merlin
SOLO
Merlin
Morgan
Merlin
Merlin
Morgan
Merlin
Maeve
Morgan
Merlin
Merlin
Morgan
Merlin
Merlin
Lunehead
Merlin
Maeve
Morgan
Merlin
Mordred
Lumpsey
Chaloner
Lumpsey
Merlin
Mordred
Merlin
Lumpsey
Merlin
0.06
0.02

0.06

0.04
0.08
0.01
0.06

0.13

2.8
3.3
1.1
0.94
1.2
0.91

2.7

0.07
0.10
0.11
0.06

1.6

1.0
0.15
2.4
0.33
0.33
0.01

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

Units

continued

Detector Mass [kg]

Ue

<12
741(247)
<14
617(123)
<63
9.9(12)
247(62)
<18
5926(617)
<93
<57
<31
<7.0
<21
<37
<18
<130
<168
123(86)
960(210)
<13
<188
2600(600)
<114
<63
<115
6135(1050)

238

Ul

<12
198(37)
4.6(7)
49(12)
<35
<12
<12
<6.2
988(123)
<15
23(6)
73(23)
14(4)
<1.0
7.4(37)
21(5)
<3.0
19(4)
11(2)
5.0(20)
<12
<8.8
52(30)
44(7)
190(80)
1100(100)
<25
<18
20(12)
2500(160)

238

The

<4.1
<41
5.0(10)
<4.1
4.8(41)
0.41(41)
<4.1
<3.0
650(41)
<9.0
22(15)
<19
4.2(7)
12(4)
<4.0
<12
<1.5
<1.5
<12
<7.2
180(60)
<10
<196
1400(200)
<44
<18
29(16)
3626(350)

232

Thl

<4.1
<41
3.0(3)
28(16)
<2.5
0.41(41)
<4.1
<2.4
650(41)
<6.0
26(9)
<21
4.1(20)
3.6(5)
5.7(33)
10.5(4)
<3.0
14(10)
<1.5
<2.2
<11
<5.3
220(30)
<4.0
<85
1700(100)
<16
<13
<8.0
3626(170)

232

K

<31
402(124)
19(5)
<31
61(26)
<31
<31
<22
4025(62)
<46
34(48)
<120
35(4)
<28
<18
58(11)
80(20)
<77
<69
170(180)
<81
<378
<250
<138
<113
<38
2786(1115)

40

Pb
<1000
<113
<475
-

210

Co
<0.20
6.0(6)
8.9(7)
21(1)
<1.0
<3.0
<2.0
-

60

0.10
0.24

Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Morgan
Lunehead

Technetics
EMD Millipore
Korea
Solid Spot
Ohmite
Weller
McMaster Carr
Various
Ohmite
McMaster Carr
UC Components
VWR International
McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr
UC Components
RediVac
City Special Metals

PTFE Resin 8764

Isopropyl Alcohol
High Purity Lead
M5 PEEK Fasteners
Forward Field Region Tuning Resistors
Pb-Free Tip Tinner
Stainless Steel Screws
Stainless Steel Fasteners
Current Monitoring Resistors
PTFE Screws
Silver Plated Stainless Steel Pan Head Screw
#4-40 x .25
Isopropyl Alcohol
PTFE Screws
Pan-Head PTFE Screws #6-32x0.25
Silver Plated Stainless Steel Pan Head Screw
#4-40 x .3125

Stainless Steel Screws

RTD Copper Enclosures

0.26

1.4
0.07
0.01

-

0.78
0.08
0.29
0.06
0.01
0.86
1.5
0.04
0.10

8.3

0.09
0.42
2.4
2.1
0.07
0.59
0.42
0.94
0.09
0.10
0.04

Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Roseberry
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Maeve
Roseberry
Merlin
Roseberry
Merlin
Merlin
Belmont
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin

Riedon
Craftech
Boedeker Plastics Inc
Boedeker Plastics Inc
Dupont
Craftech
Craftech
Craftech
Ohmite
Ohmite
Ohmite

Grading Resistors
PTFE Washers
PEEK Virgin Natural Sheet 1.000
PEEK Virgin Natural Sheet 1.500
PTFE Powder
PTFE Screws
PTFE Screws
PTFE Screws
Resistors
Resistors
Forward Field Region Tuning Resistors

Ue

<123
<47
<25
<178

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

<11
<216
<639

<0.29

4100(400)
<50
<10
<10
8.0(50)
<40
<62
<24
2704(405)
2700(300)
931(649)
<5.9
<0.10
<15
<106
<62
757(265)
7300(700)
<20
<12
2300(1300)
<135

238

mBq/kg

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

mBq/Unit

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

Units

continued

Detector Mass [kg]

Supplier

Sample

Ul

<16
<5.8
<9.0

<35

<5.0
<35
<240

1.4(2)

3700(200)
<19
16(3)
<5.0
13(5)
<12
28(19)
<6.2
1678(85)
2100(100)
1282(175)
<0.18
0.40(20)
<6.5
<6.0
62(25)
457(94)
350(120)
<6.0
<5.0
1200(300)
<34

238

The

<23
<10
<9.0

<57

<7.0
<65
<373

<0.16

5300(200)
<22
18(6)
<6.0
4.0(50)
<20
<20
<6.5
2511(191)
2600(100)
2053(316)
<0.16
<0.20
<10
<6.0
133(53)
<130
100(70)
<10
<4.0
1800(600)
<41

232

Thl

<14
<2.9
<11

<31

<7.0
<52
<387

0.33(15)

5900(200)
<12
13(3)
<6.0
5.0(20)
14(8)
16(10)
11(5)
2557(98)
3000(100)
2428(195)
<0.17
<0.04
<9.8
<4.0
25(13)
229(63)
<20
<8.0
13(6)
2200(300)
<65

232

K

<77
<35
<68

<135

<19
<210
<1264

<0.49

4500(700)
820(115)
39(6)
<31
45(25)
787(100)
830(100)
785(120)
<332
1300(400)
<1137
<0.51
2.9(13)
<27
<25
156(91)
<401
2100(500)
<31
<19
1800(2300)
<195

40

Pb

-

-

<81
-

-

274(37)
<22
<1.6
<93
54000(3600)
-

210

Co

<3.0

-

-

-

<3.0
<0.10
<4.0
<24
6.0(40)
43(5)
-

60

Merlin

McMaster Carr
Solid Spot
LBNL Fabrication
LBNL Fabrication
LBNL Fabrication
LBNL Fabrication
McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr
All States
University of Oxford Fabrication
University of Oxford Fabrication
University of Oxford Fabrication
University of Oxford Fabrication
Associated Springs
LZ Chosen PTFE
McMaster Carr
McMaster
Mouser Electronics
TE connectivity
Newark/3M
McMaster Carr
Silicon Valley MFG
California Fine Wire
RS Components
City Special Metals
Timet (LZ Stock)
University of Oxford Fabrication

Stainless Steel Fasteners
PEEK Fasteners
PEEK Resistor Tap
Stainless Steel HV Connector
Extraction Region Stainless Steel Plates
Extraction Region T-Washer
Extraction Region Misc Stainless Steel
Components
Field Cage PTFE Washers
Cable Ties
Long Level Sensor 300mm
Position Sensor
Cu Coupon
PEEK Coupon
Washers
Combined PTFE Skin System
Stainless Steel Skin System Repair Kit
PTFE Washers & Screws
Cable Ties

Heat Shrink For LZ Gate/Anode

Copper Cable Connection Lugs
PTFE Screw Pan Head Slotted #10-32 x 1
Heater Block Plate
Stainless Steel Grid Wire
Hexapod Springs
Hexapod Copper
Hexapod Titanium Parts
Position Sensors

Merlin
SOLO
Merrybent
Lunehead
Chaloner
Lunehead
Merlin
Maeve
Merlin
Maeve
Maeve
Merlin
Morgan
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Roseberry
SOLO
Mordred
Maeve

Lunehead
Merrybent
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin

Digikey

Harwin Pins

0.04
0.07
0.47
0.05
1.7
2.4
-

0.18

0.08
1.9
0.31
0.19
1.9
0.11
0.18

0.72

2.5
0.53
0.13
0.63
0.12

0.01

mBq/kg
mBq/Unit
mBq/Unit
mBq/Unit
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
µBq/Unit
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/Unit
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/Unit

mBq/kg

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/Unit
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

Units

continued

Detector Mass [kg]

Supplier

Sample

Ue

<180
<93
<20
<24
<23
<270
3.3(24)
<109
<9.9
<96
<123
<78
<86
<430
<142
<1.9
<17
<7.0
<27
<8.9
<3.1

<18

450(220)
420(260)
26(19)
<45
<2.3
<108
<18
<110

238

Ul

<49
<27
<1.5
<1.2
<1.8
<17
<0.03
32(5)
<4.9
29(8)
26(7)
<23
<8.6
<108
<56
<0.70
<5.6
23(8)
<3.7
<1.1
5.3(3)

36(6)

200(90)
730(210)
<2.5
<10
<0.60
<51
204(15)
679(29)

238

The

<94
<25
<0.70
1.4(10)
<2.3
13(10)
0.42(62)
36(12)
<3.7
<17
<8.9
<37
<12
<170
<76
<0.80
<8.1
33(12)
2.0(14)
<2.4
<1.0

<8.5

<100
<40
2.4(50)
<12
<1.3
<36
<16
<33

232

Thl

<61
<16
<0.40
<1.0
<1.9
<10
0.51(38)
51(6)
<2.6
63(12)
<7.4
<30
<11
<195
88(74)
<0.70
<8.5
22(4)
<4.5
<1.7
<0.64

<9.5

80(25)
90(30)
4.0(30)
37(17)
<0.90
<32
38(12)
145(25)

232

K

<327
<117
<4.1
<6.5
<16
<90
<1.2
<70
<16
<98
<34
<98
<56
<465
<533
<2.6
<34
<51
<25
<5.0
<1.9

<31

<630
<580
<9.3
<49
<4.1
<134
<28
<169

40

Pb

480(180)
<45
<96
-

-

<36
-

210

Co

<0.30
<0.30
<0.60
<4.0
0.82(6)
5.1(12)
302(19)
-

-

<40
<17
6.5(5)
12(4)
-

60

ST707 Getter Material (Used)
ST707 Getter Material (Fresh)
Getter Raw Material ‘Standard Zr’
Getter Raw Material ‘Non-Standard Clean Zr’
Getter Raw Material Fe-V Alloy
Citric Acid Powder
Calcium-Carbide Getter
Carboact Charcoal
Extruded PTFE Tubing
PTFE Barbed Fittings
Cable Ties
Stainless Steel Transfer Lines & Weir Drains
Stainless Steel Transfer Lines & Weir Drains
PEEK Screws #4-40 x 0.25 Pan Head
5/16 OD PTFE Tube
Xe Fluid Nozzle Sleeve
Valves For Xe Supply & Return
Xe Thermosiphon Hardware
Stainless Steel VCR adaptors M/F

SAES
SAES
SAES
SAES
SAES
Sigma Aldrich
Sigma Aldrich
Carboact
ZEUS
ZEUS
All States
Tecnifab
Tecnifab
McMaster Carr
ZEUS
Technifab
Technifab
Technifab
Swagelok

University of Oxford Fabrication
University of Oxford Fabrication
Boedeker
Measurement Specialties
McMaster Carr
Panduit
Chemis

Position Sensors
Weir Precision Sensors (WPS)
PEEK Grid Spacer Replacement Parts
Acoustic Sensors
Hardware For Vent Tube Assembly
PEEK Cable Ties
M3 PEEK Screws

Xenon Circulation System

Supplier

Sample

Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Chaloner
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Maeve
Maeve
Merlin
Merlin
Merlin
Morgan
Morgan
Maeve

Maeve
Maeve
Merlin
Maeve
Morgan
Maeve
Maeve

3.2
1.4
1.5

0.45
0.10
0.10
0.11
0.11
1.0
0.10
1.0
0.42
0.07
0.05
0.81
0.72
0.41

0.18
0.48
0.17
0.06

Detector Mass [kg]

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/Unit
mBq/kg
mBq/Unit
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

mBq/Unit
mBq/Unit
mBq/Unit
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

Units

Ue

2600(600)
11000(2000)
481(111)
<247
<173
<1.0
10819(5208)
20(9)
<62
<154
<330
<45
<43
<0.12
<41
<8.3
<8.6
<9.5
<4.8

<3.1
<1.9
<0.80
<433
<39
<120
<1096

238

Ul

<10
<50
<37
<37
<37
<1.0
17785(220)
36(8)
<13
<44
<67
8.6(37)
24(2)
0.21(4)
<12
<1.7
<1.1
<1.5
2.1(8)

5.3(3)
3.7(5)
<0.30
<58
<4.9
<15
<142

238

The

130(20)
20(10)
<53
73(24)
<41
<1.0
4821(285)
<4.0
<12
<100
<137
<6.1
<5.3
0.30(8)
<12
<3.6
2.2(13)
<2.0
2.1(12)

<1.0
2.3(4)
<0.50
<78
<6.5
<14
<327

232

Thl

70(20)
30(10)
<24
<20
<20
<1.0
6462(194)
16(2)
<16
<93
<165
11(2)
12(5)
0.37(5)
<12
<4.2
2.2(13)
<1.9
1.0(5)

<0.64
2.9(3)
<0.50
71(67)
<4.4
4.0(32)
<203

232

K

<80
220(30)
155(22)
898(62)
164(22)
<1000
<288
780(55)
<61
<231
<465
<9.3
<16
<0.16
<55
<12
<13
<10
<3.1

<1.9
19(2)
<1.4
<216
<28
<41
<739

40

-

Pb

25(18)
-

210

Co

3.0(20)
14(4)
58(5)
3.5(6)
6.0(5)
7.9(7)

27(8)
-

60

Titanium Welding Wire 1.6 mm
Titanium Welding Wire 1.6 mm
Titanium Welding Wire 3.2 mm
Ti Cryostat Weld Chips; Support Leg; Etched
Ti Cryostat Weld Chips; Support Leg; Cleaned
Ti Cryostat Weld Chips; Support Leg; Uncleaned
Ti Cryostat Weld Chips; Welded Coupon Location 3; Cleaned
Ti Cryostat Weld Chips; Welded Coupon Location 3; Cleaned
Ti Cryostat Weld Chips; Welded Coupon Location 3; Uncleaned
Ti Cryostat Weld Chips; Welded Coupon Location 2; Etched
Ti Cryostat Weld Chips; Welded Coupon Location 2; Cleaned
Ti Cryostat Weld Chips; Welded Coupon Location 2; Uncleaned
Ti Cryostat Weld Chips; Welded Coupon Location 1; Etched
Ti Cryostat Weld Chips; Welded Coupon Location 1; Cleaned
Ti Cryostat Weld Chips; Welded Coupon Location 1; Uncleaned
Ti Cryostat Weld Chips; Plasma Welds; Etched
Ti Cryostat Weld Chips; Plasma Welds; Cleaned
Ti Cryostat Weld Chips; Plasma Welds; Uncleaned
Ti Cryostat Weld Chips; TIG Welds; Etched
Ti Cryostat Weld Chips; TIG Welds; Cleaned

Cryostat

Sample

Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)

Supplier

continued

Table A2: ICP-MS Screening Results.

UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL

Detector

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

Units

U

2.6(4)
66(1)
2.9(4)
2.7(3)
2.7(2)
3.2(1)
2.0(3)
1.8(3)
2.7(3)
1.9(2)
1.9(4)
2.0(3)
2.1(2)
2.2(5)
2.4(6)
2.5(1)
2.4(2)
2.4(8)
3.3(4)
3.8(4)

238

Th

0.63(6)
13(1)
0.27(10)
2.3(2)
2.7(1)
3.8(3)
42(39)
28(1)
96(2)
13(3)
12(1)
16(1)
0.12(3)
0.13(17)
0.48(16)
2.5(10)
3.4(10)
3.6(3)
1.2(1)
1.7(4)

232

Supplier
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Timet (LZ Stock)
Technetics
Technetics
Technetics
Styrodure

Sample

Ti Cryostat Weld Chips; TIG Welds; Uncleaned
Welding Electrode; 4.0 mm W-La From Wolfram; Etched
Welding Electrode; 4.0 mm W-La From Wolfram; Cleaned
Welding Electrode; 4.0 mm W-La From Wolfram; Uncleaned
Welding Electrode; Pure W From Plansee; Etched
Welding Electrode; Pure W From Plansee; Cleaned
Welding Electrode; Pure W From Plansee; Uncleaned
Ti cryostat OCV Weld Chips; Cleaned
Ti cryostat OCV Weld Chips; Cleaned
Ti cryostat OCV Weld Chips; Uncleaned
Welding Electrode; 3.2 mm OD W-La From Wolfram; Cleaned
Welding Electrode; 3.2 mm OD W-La From Wolfram; Uncleaned
Welding Electrode; 4.0 mm OD W-La From Wolfram; Cleaned
Welding Electrode; 4.0 mm OD W-La From Wolfram; Unleaned
Welding Electrode; 4.0 mm OD W-La From Plansee; Cleaned
Welding Electrode; 4.0 mm OD W-La From Plansee; Unleaned
Helicoflex Seal Aluminium
Helicoflex Seal Nimonic90
Helicoflex Seal Inconel
Polystyrene Foam
continued

UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL

Detector
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

Units

U
4.1(3)
2.1(2)
2.1(2)
2.1(2)
2.1(1)
2.1(3)
2.4(2)
2.6(3)
2.8(2)
2.9(3)
2.2(2)
2.4(1)
2.3(1)
2.6(2)
3.0(3)
3.5(2)
998(82)
275(7)
337(37)
4.2(8)

238

Th
1.5(2)
4.7(7)
5.9(3)
6.2(2)
36(2)
41(1)
47(1)
3.6(12)
2.4(4)
3.9(7)
0.42(8)
1.5(2)
6.2(2)
8.2(3)
25(2)
33(1)
280(23)
5.6(4)
4.0(4)
1.2(2)

232

Loop Antennae Sensor Cu Wire

TPC

Tinned-Cu Cable Sample
Cable - Cu Sheath Material
Cable - Cu Conductor

PMT Cabling

Outer Detector Tank Acrylic
Outer Detector Tank Acrylic
Acrylic Sheet
Cast Acrylic Slab
Adhesive

Outer Detector

SNO Acrylic
JUNO Acrylic
JUNO Acrylic

Scientific Wire Company

AXON
AXON
AXON

Reynolds (from Thailand)
Reynolds
Reynolds
Reynolds
Reynolds

RPT
Juno Experiment
Juno Experiment

Styrodure
Timet
Timet
Timet
Timet
RUAG (Vienna)
Foam Factory
Timet

Polystyrene Foam
Forward Field Region Titanium Weld Sample
Forward Field Region Titanium Weld Sample
Ti weld sample from CHAMP; Material Adjacent To Weld
Ti weld sample from CHAMP; Weld Material
Multi-Layer Insulation
Polyethylene Foam
Titanium Plate 4 x 6 0.125

Misc

Supplier

Sample

UCL

UCL
UCL
UCL

UCL
UCL
University of Alabama
University of Alabama
University of Alabama

University of Alabama
University of Alabama
University of Alabama

UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
University of Alabama
University of Alabama
PNNL

Detector

mBq/kg

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

Units

U

0.19(8)

0.22(4)
0.87(11)
0.23(7)

0.04(4)
0.11(11)
0.13(3)
0.31(5)
<0.10

0.30(12)
0.27(5)
0.66(11)

3.3(10)
2.1(2)
2.4(3)
2.3(4)
2.9(3)
14(2)
20(3)
9.8(2)

238

Th

0.05(4)

0.11(2)
0.16(4)
0.07(1)

0.02(3)
0.03(3)
0.26(8)
0.20(7)
<0.13

0.36(7)
0.03(1)
0.15(2)

0.57(21)
0.14(4)
4.3(2)
0.59(13)
15(1)
31(6)
2.6(4)
0.09(1)

232

Ti Plate HN3469
Ti Plate HN3469
Ti Plate 4 x 6 0.125
Ti Plate 4 x 6 0.125
Ti Plate 0.125 HN2470
NEXT100 50 mm SS Flange Material
NEXT100 SS 15 mm Cryostat Cover Material
NEXT100 SS 10 mm For Shell
Titanium - Timet Japanese Mill
Stainless Steel Plate - Gerda G2
Stainless Steel Plate - Gerda G1
Stainless Steel Plate - Gerda D6
LUX Ti sample
Ti Sheet Stock
0.3125 Ti Sheet Stock Grade CP-2
0.375 Ti Sheet Stock Grade CP-1

Cryostat

Sample

Timet
Timet
Timet
Timet
Timet
Nironit
Nironit
Nironit
Timet
Ilsenburg
Ilsenburg
Ilsenburg
Supra Alloy
Timet
PTG
Supra Alloy

Supplier

NRC
NRC
NRC
NRC
NRC
NRC
NRC
NRC
NRC
NRC
NRC
NRC
NRC
NRC
NRC
NRC

Detector

0.35
0.35
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.30
0.40
0.40
0.40

Mass [g]

Table A3: GDMS Screening Results.

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

Units

Ue

<2.5
<2.5
<1.2
<1.2
<4.0
∼12
∼12
∼7.4
7.4+7.4
−3.7
∼5.0
∼5.0
∼5.0
11+11
−5
11+11
−5
12+12
−6
36+36
−18

238

The

<0.81
<0.81
<0.41
<0.41
<1.2
<0.20
<0.20
<0.20
<0.80
<0.40
<0.40
<0.40
<0.40
<0.80
4.0+4.0
−2.0
3.2+3.2
−1.6

232

K

<0.31
<0.34
<0.15
<0.22
<0.60
<0.60
<0.60
<0.60
<0.10
<0.30
∼3.0
<2.0
<0.10
<0.15
<7.0
<7.0

40

PTFE 8764 For Skin Region
PTFE FLON008
Teflon NXT85
Teflon 807NX
PTFE 8764

TPC

Raw FEP Pellets
Raw FEP Pellets
FEP Inner Cable Jacket
FEP Outer Cable Jacket

PMT Cabling

Sample

Boedeker Plastics
Flontech
DuPont
DuPont
Boedeker Plastics

Axon
Axon
Axon
Axon

Supplier

University of Alabama
University of Alabama
University of Alabama
University of Alabama
University of Alabama

University of Alabama
University of Alabama
University of Alabama
University of Alabama

Detector

Table A4: NAA Screening Results.

8.0
2.8
2.9
2.8
2.8

3.1
3.1
2.6
2.6

Mass [g]

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg
mBq/kg

Units

Ue

0.018(40)
<0.027
<0.021
0.038(10)
<0.043

<0.017
<0.005
<0.057
<0.024

238

The

0.029(1)
0.051(3)
0.028(2)
0.029(2)
0.013(3)

0.036(2)
0.037(2)
0.083(8)
0.096(6)

232

K

0.076(1)
0.33(2)
0.122(10)
0.096(5)
0.066(4)

0.168(4)
0.175(4)
5.053(78)
10.7(20)

40

HV Umbilical Epoxy
Umbilical Cable (Rejected)

High Voltage

LZ Inner Cryostat Vessel (fully constructed)
PEEK Flat Stock
PEEK Samples
LZ Sensors
Teflon (PTFE)
Sensor Cable
Cryostat Seals
Titanium Sheets (untreated)
Titanium Sheets (etched)

Cryostat

PMT Signal Feedthrough
PMT HV Feedthrough (Before Potting)
PMT Signal Feedthrough
PMT Signal Feedthrough
Anode/Gate Feedthrough

Conduits

Welding Rods

Calibration

Sample

Stycast
Dielectric Sciences

Loterios
Boedeker
Boedeker
University of Oxford Fabrication
Technetics
Axon
Technetics
Timet
Timet

Accuglass
CeraTec
Accuglass
Accuglass
CeraTec

HTP from USAWeld

Supplier

continued

University of Alabama
SDSM&T

SDSM&T
SDSM&T
SDSM&T
SDSM&T
SDSM&T
SDSM&T
University of Alabama
UCL
UCL

University of Alabama
University of Maryland
University of Maryland
University of Alabama
SDSM&T

SDSM&T

Detector

Table A5: Radon Emanation Results.

0.11 m2
12 unit

1 unit
2993.54 cm2
20858 cm2
1 unit
17 m
454 m
1 unit
2350 cm2
2350 cm2

5 unit
21 unit
16 unit
9 unit
4 unit

1 unit

Quantity Screened

µBq/m2
µBq/unit

µBq/unit
µBq/cm2
µBq/cm2
µBq/batch
µBq/m2
µBq/m
µBq/unit
µBq/cm2
µBq/cm2

µBq/unit
µBq/unit
µBq/unit
µBq/unit
µBq/unit

µBq/unit

Units

Rn

7106 ± 2007
995 ± 694

46100+4000
−3800
0.056+0.041
−0.053
0.0053+0.0078
−0.0053
324+116
−185
12+5
−10
1.7+1.3
−1.2
<741
0.17 ± 0.04
0.29 ± 0.04

<110
17.0 ± 4.1
5.1+4.7
−3.5
104 ± 36
12+23
−12

185+104
−81

222

Calibration Source (2016)
Dust From SURF 4850L - Warm And Vented
Helicoflex Aluminum Sheet
Mobile Xenon Sampling System
Test Cryostat
A1 Ultrafine Dust
A4 Coarse Dust

University of Alabama
N/A
Technetics
Various
NorCal
Powder Technology
Powder Technology

DuPont
Dichtomatik
Various
Dielectric Sciences
Stycast
Accuglass
Ceramtech

Delrin (Polyoxymethylene)
Viton O-Rings
HV Cathode System Components
Umbilical Cables
HV Umbilical Epoxy
PMT HV Feedthrough
Epoxy Potted HV Flanges

Misc

Supplier

Sample

continued

SDSM&T
University of Alabama
SDSM&T
University of Maryland
SDSM&T
University of Alabama
University of Alabama

UCL
UCL
UCL
SDSM&T
University of Alabama
University of Alabama
University of Maryland

Detector

µBq/unit
µBq/g
µBq/cm2
µBq/unit
µBq/unit
µBq/g
µBq/g

µBq/m2
µBq/unit
µBq/batch
µBq/m
µBq/m2
µBq/unit
µBq/unit
0.54 m2
90 unit
1 unit
25 m
0.11 m2
5 unit
4 unit

1 unit
163.4 g
5000 cm2
1 unit
1 unit
103.1 g
124.1 g

Units

Quantity Screened

Rn

787 ± 174
1550 ± 200
60+28
−38
450+125
−106
405+220
−174
6750 ± 410
3300 ± 310

440 ± 116
17 ± 2.3
369 ± 85
52+8.1
−12
5010 ± 2630
<174
37+13
−10

222

Powder Technology
Powder Technology
N/A
N/A
Loterios
Loterios
Omega
U. Maryland Fabrication
Western States Fire Protection

AFRL-02 Dust
AFRL-03 Dust
Dust From SURF 4850L
Dust From SURF 4850L
TIG Welded Titanium Block (untreated)
TIG Welded Titanium Block (etched)
PT100 RTDs
Compressor Maintenance Cart
Surface Assembly Lab Sprinkler Head

KEMET
KEMET
VISHAY
VISHAY
Hamamatsu
Imperial College London Fabrication

PMT Capacitors (After Cooling In Jar)
PMT Capacitors (After Cooling)
PMT Resistors
PMT Resistors

PMTs (2-inch)

PMT Bases (1-inch)

PMTs, PMT bases and their components

Supplier

Sample

continued

UCL

SDSM&T

University of Alabama
University of Alabama
UCL
UCL

University of Alabama
University of Alabama
University of Alabama
University of Alabama
UCL
UCL
UCL
University of Maryland
SDSM&T

Detector

0.5 kg
0.5 kg
25000 unit
3650 unit
42 PMTs 14 bases
unit
100 unit

295.7 g
323.6 g
0.2172 kg
0.2172 kg
325 cm2
325 cm2
150 unit
1 unit
1 unit

Quantity Screened

Rn

729 ± 486
1080 ± 544
1550 ± 116
324 ± 81
100+190
−100
4.4 ± 0.9

µBq/unit
µBq/unit

330 ± 110
190 ± 110
739 ± 125
900 ± 153
1.7 ± 0.3
1.1 ± 0.2
231 ± 35
260 ± 60
2600 ± 104

222

µBq/kg
µBq/kg
µBq/batch
µBq/batch

µBq/g
µBq/g
µBq/g
µBq/g
µBq/cm2
µBq/cm2
µBq/batch
µBq/unit
µBq/unit

Units

Loop Antenna & Screws
Tivar 1000 ESD

TPC

Gore PMT Cables
Axon Cables
Connector Boards
PMT Signal Flanges
PMT Signal Flanges

University Of Oxford Fabrication
Quadrant From Boedeker Stock

Gore
Axon
Imperial College London Fabrication
Accuglass
CeramTec

Imperial College London Fabrication
Cirlex
KEMET
Ceramaseal
Hamamatsu
Hamamatsu

PMT Bases (3-inch)
PCB/Cirlex
PMT Capacitors (Before Cooling)
PMT HV Feedthrough (After Potting)
PMTs (3-inch)
PMTs (1-inch)

PMT Cabling

Supplier

Sample

continued

SDSM&T
SDSM&T

UCL
SDSM&T
University of Alabama
University of Maryland
University of Maryland

UCL
UCL
University of Alabama
University of Maryland
SDSM&T
SDSM&T

Detector

10 unit
12536 cm2

0.957 kg
3000 m
1200 unit
4 unit
4 unit

124 unit
421 g
0.5 kg
21 unit
93 unit
95 unit

Quantity Screened

µBq/unit
µBq/m2

µBq/kg
µBq
µBq/unit
µBq/g
µBq/unit

µBq/unit
µBq/g
µBq/kg
µBq/unit
µBq/unit
µBq/unit

Units

Rn

1+8
−1
35+69
−35

< 130
613 ± 127
<0.35
23+13
−10
17 ± 8.1

5 ± 0.87
1.4 ± 0.35
3510 ± 961
5.2 ± 2.4
1.9+1.7
−1.9
7.1+2.5
−3

222

Heat Exchanger
Compressor Head
Getter Cabinet
PCB 4 x 8 Charcoal
OVC 4 x 8 Charcoal
Conditioning Heat Exchangers
Cryogenic Valve
Heat Exchanger
Adsorbant
Adsorbant (Pre-Eteching)
OVC 4 x 8 Charcoal
Synthetic Charcoal
Synthetic Charcoal
Synthetic Adsorbant

FNAL Fabrication
Fluitron
SAES
Calgon
Calgon
Standard Xchange
WEKA
Xylem US
Saratech
Saratech
Calgon
Carbo-Act
MAST
Saratech/Blouecher

Fralock (McMaster Carr)

Kapton

Xenon Circulation System

Supplier

Sample

continued

SDSM&T
University of Maryland
SDSM&T
University of Maryland
University of Maryland
University of Maryland
University of Maryland
University of Maryland
University of Maryland
University of Maryland
University of Maryland
University of Maryland
University of Maryland
University of Maryland

SDSM&T

Detector

µBq/unit
µBq/unit
µBq/unit
µBq/kg
µBq/kg
µBq/unit
µBq/unit
µBq/unit
µBq/kg
µBq/kg
µBq/kg
µBq/kg
µBq/kg
µBq/kg

µBq/cm2

25000 cm2

1 unit
1 unit
1 unit
0.03 kg
0.432 kg
4 unit
3 unit
1 unit
1 kg
1 kg
0.472 kg
0.363 kg
0.19 kg
0.585 kg

Units

Quantity Screened

Rn

197+185
−197
1570 ± 266
2260+278
−266
850000 ± 57900
35900 ± 2780
35+25
−24
178+28
−27
524+81
−74
890 ± 410
1780 ± 210
64800 ± 3820
336+417
−197
2790 ± 787
1790 ± 324

56+104
−56

222

Supplier
Osaka Gas Chemicals
WEKA
Fluitron
Fluitron
Fluitron
U. Maryland Fabrication
DuPont
U. Michigan Fabrication
U. Michigan Fabrication
U. Maryland Fabrication
U. Maryland Fabrication

Sample

Shirasagi Charcoal
Cryogenic Valve
Circulation Compressor #1 heads
Circulation Compressor #2 heads
Full Circulation Compressor #2
Xe Transfer Lines
Vespel Gas Valve Seats
Radon Reduction System Panel
Radon Reduction System Plumbing
TIG Welds On 0.5” SS Tubing
Main Circulation Panel

University of Maryland
University of Maryland
University of Maryland
University of Maryland
University of Maryland
University of Maryland
University of Alabama
University of Maryland
University of Maryland
University of Maryland
University of Maryland

Detector

0.512 kg
1 unit
2 unit
2 unit
1 unit
1 unit
36 unit
1 unit
1 unit
1m
1 unit

Quantity Screened

µBq/kg
µBq/unit
µBq/unit
µBq/unit
µBq/unit
µBq/unit
µBq/unit
µBq/unit
µBq/unit
µBq/m
µBq/unit

Units

Rn
101000 ± 8100
247 ± 56
375 ± 50
391 ± 56
17000 ± 500
223 ± 72
15 ± 9.3
286+110
−91
160 ± 57
34 ± 21
744 ± 198

222

