arXiv:1910.09124v2 [physics.ins-det] 4 Nov 2019

The LUX-ZEPLIN (LZ) Experiment
D.S. Akeriba,b , C.W. Akerlofc , D. Yu. Akimovd , A. Alquahtanie , S.K. Alsumf , T.J. Andersona,b , N. Angelidesg ,
H.M. Araújoh , A. Arbucklef , J.E. Armstrongi , M. Arthursc , H. Auyeunga , X. Baij , A.J. Baileyh , J. Balajthyk ,
S. Balashovl , J. Bange , M.J. Barrym , J. Bartheln , D. Bauerh , P. Bauern , A. Baxtero , J. Bellep , P. Beltrameq ,
J. Bensingerr , T. Bensonf , E.P. Bernards,m , A. Bernsteint , A. Bhattii , A. Biekerts,m , T.P. Biesiadzinskia,b ,
B. Birrittellaf , K.E. Boastu , A.I. Bolozdynyad , E.M. Boultonv,s , B. Boxero , R. Bramantea,b , S. Bransonf , P. Brásw ,
M. Breidenbacha , J.H. Buckleyx , V.V. Bugaevx , R. Bunkerj , S. Burdino , J.K. Busenitzy , J.S. Campbellf , C. Carelsu ,
D.L. Carlsmithf , B. Carlsonn , M.C. Carmona-Benitezz , M. Cascellag , C. Chane , J.J. Cherwinkaf , A.A. Chilleraa ,
C. Chilleraa , N.I. Chottj , A. Colem , J. Colemanm , D. Collingh , R.A. Conleya , A. Cottleu , R. Coughlenj ,
W.W. Craddocka , D. Currann , A. Currieh , J.E. Cutterk , J.P. da Cunhaw , C.E. Dahlab,p , S. Dardinm , S. Dasuf ,
J. Davisn , T.J.R. Davisonq , L. de Viveirosz , N. Decheinef , A. Dobim , J.E.Y. Dobsong , E. Druszkiewiczac , A. Dushkinr ,
T.K. Edbergi , W.R. Edwardsm , B.N. Edwardsv , J. Edwardsf , M.M. Elnimry , W.T. Emmetv , S.R. Eriksenad ,
C.H. Fahamm , A. Fana,b , S. Fayerh , S. Fioruccim , H. Flaecherad , I.M. Fogarty Florangi , P. Fordl , V.B. Francisl ,
F. Froborgh , T. Fruthu , R.J. Gaitskelle , N.J. Gantosm , D. Garciae , A. Geffren , V.M. Gehmanm , R. Gelfandac ,
J. Genovesij , R.M. Gerhardk , C. Ghagg , E. Gibsonu , M.G.D. Gilchriesem , S. Gokhaleae , B. Gomberf , T.G. Gondaa ,
A. Greenallo , S. Greenwoodh , G. Gregersonf , M.G.D. van der Grintenl , C.B. Gwilliamo , C.R. Halli , D. Hamiltonf ,
S. Hansae , K. Hanzelm , T. Harringtonf , A. Harrisonj , C. Hasselkusf , S.J. Haselschwardtaf , D. Hemerk , S.A. Hertelag ,
J. Heisef , S. Hillbrandk , O. Hitchcockf , C. Hjemfeltj , M.D. Hoffm , B. Holbrookk , E. Holtoml , J.Y-K. Hory , M. Hornn ,
D.Q. Huange , T.W. Hurteauv , C.M. Ignarraa,b , M.N. Irvingk , R.G. Jacobsens,m , O. Jahangirg , S.N. Jefferyl , W. Jia,b ,
M. Johnsonn , J. Johnsonk , P. Johnsonf , W.G. Jonesh , A.C. Kabothai,l , A. Kamahaah , K. Kamdinm,s , V. Kaseyh ,
K. Kazkazt , J. Keefnern , D. Khaitanac , M. Khaleeqh , A. Khazovl , A.V. Khromovd , I. Khuranag , Y.D. Kimaj ,
W.T. Kimaj , C.D. Kochere , A.M. Konovalovd , L. Korleyr , E.V. Korolkovaak , M. Koyuncuac , J. Krasf , H. Krausu ,
S.W. Kravitzm , H.J. Krebsa , L. Kreczkoad , B. Kriklerad , V.A. Kudryavtsevak , A.V. Kumpand , S. Kyreaf ,
A.R. Lambertm , B. Landerudf , N.A. Larsenv , A. Laundrief , E.A. Leasonq , H.S. Leeaj , J. Leeaj , C. Leea,b ,
B.G. Lenardok , D.S. Leonardaj , R. Leonardj , K.T. Leskom , C. Levyah , J. Liaj , Y. Liuf , J. Liaoe , F.-T. Liaou , J. Lins,m ,
A. Lindotew , R. Linehana,b , W.H. Lippincottp , R. Liue , X. Liuq , C. Loniewskiac , M.I. Lopesw , B. López Paredesh ,
W. Lorenzonc , D. Luceron , S. Luitza , J.M. Lylee , C. Lynche , P.A. Majewskil , J. Makkinjee , D.C. Mallinge ,
A. Manalaysayk , L. Manentig , R.L. Manninof , N. Marangouh , D.J. Markleyp , P. MarrLaundrief , T.J. Martinp ,
M.F. Marzioniq , C. Maupinn , C.T. McConnellm , D.N. McKinseys,m , J. McLaughlinab , D.-M. Meiaa , Y. Mengy ,
E.H. Millera,b , Z.J. Minakerk , E. Mizrachii , J. Mockah,m , D. Molashj , A. Montep , M.E. Monzania,b , J.A. Moradk ,
E. Morrisonj , B.J. Mountal , A.St.J. Murphyq , D. Naimk , A. Naylorak , C. Nedlikag , C. Nehrkornaf , H.N. Nelsonaf ,
J. Nesbitf , F. Nevesw , J.A. Nikkell , J.A. Nikoleyczikf , A. Nilimaq , J. O’Delll , H. Ohac , F.G. O’Neilla , K. O’Sullivanm,s ,
I. Olcinah , M.A. Olevitchx , K.C. Oliver-Mallorym,s , L. Oxboroughf , A. Pagacf , D. Pagenkopfaf , S. Palw ,
K.J. Palladinof , V.M. Palmaccioi , J. Palmerai , M. Pangilinane , S.J. Pattonm , E.K. Peasem , B.P. Penningr , G. Pereiraw ,
C. Pereiraw , I.B. Petersonm , A. Piepkey , S. Piersona , S. Powello , R.M. Preecel , K. Pushkinc , Y. Qieac , M. Racinea ,
B.N. Ratcliffa , J. Reichenbacherj , L. Reichhartg , C.A. Rhynee , A. Richardsh , Q. Riffards,m , G.R.C. Rischbieterah ,
J.P. Rodriguesw , H.J. Roseo , R. Roseroae , P. Rossiterak , R. Rucinskip , G. Rutherforde , D. Ryndersn , J.S. Sabam ,
L. Sabarotsf , D. Santoneai , M. Sarychevp , A.B.M.R. Sazzady , R.W. Schneej , M. Schubnellc , P.R. Scovelll ,
M. Seversonf , D. Seymoure , S. Shawaf , G.W. Shutta , T.A. Shutta,b , J.J. Silki , C. Silvaw , K. Skarpaasa , W. Skulskiac ,
A.R. Smithm , R.J. Smiths,m , R.E. Smithf , J. Soj , M. Solmazaf , V.N. Solovovw , P. Sorensenm , V.V. Sosnovtsevd ,
I. Stancuy , M.R. Starkj , S. Stephensonk , N. Sterne , A. Stevensu , T.M. Stiegleram , K. Stiftera,b , R. Studleyr ,
T.J. Sumnerh , K. Sundarnathj , P. Sutcliffeo , N. Swansone , M. Szydagisah , M. Tanu , W.C. Taylore , R. Taylorh ,
D.J. Taylorn , D. Templesab , B.P. Tennysonv , P.A. Termanam , K.J. Thomasm , J.A. Thomsonk , D.R. Tiedti ,
M. Timalsinaj , W.H. Toa,b , A. Tomásh , T.E. Topep , M. Tripathik , D.R. Tronstadj , C.E. Tullm , W. Turnero ,
L. Tvrznikovav,s , M. Utesp , U. Utkug , S. Uvarovk , J. Va’vraa , A. Vachereth , A. Vaitkuse , J.R. Verbuse , T. Vietanenf ,
E. Voirinp , C.O. Vuosalof , S. Walcottf , W.L. Waldronm , K. Walkerf , J.J. Wangr , R. Wangp , L. Wangaa , Y. Wangac ,
J.R. Watsons,m , J. Migneaulte , S. Weatherlyi , R.C. Webbam , W.-Z. Weiaa , M. Whileaa , R.G. Whitea,b , J.T. Whiteam ,
D.T. Whiteaf , T.J. Whitisa,an , W.J. Wisniewskia , K. Wilsonm , M.S. Witherellm,s , F.L.H. Wolfsac , J.D. Wolfsac ,
D. Woodwardz , S.D. Worml , X. Xiange , Q. Xiaof , J. Xut , M. Yehae , J. Yinac , I. Youngp , C. Zhangaa
a

b

SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA 94025-7015, USA
Kavli Institute for Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-4085 USA
c
University of Michigan, Randall Laboratory of Physics, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1040, USA
d
National Research Nuclear University MEPhI (NRNU MEPhI), Moscow, 115409, RUS

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

November 5, 2019

e

Brown University, Department of Physics, Providence, RI 02912-9037, USA
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Department of Physics, Madison, WI 53706-1390, USA
g
University College London (UCL), Department of Physics and Astronomy, London WC1E 6BT, UK
h
Imperial College London, Physics Department, Blackett Laboratory, London SW7 2AZ, UK
i
University of Maryland, Department of Physics, College Park, MD 20742-4111, USA
j
South Dakota School of Mines and Technology, Rapid City, SD 57701-3901, USA
k
University of California, Davis, Department of Physics, Davis, CA 95616-5270, USA
l
STFC Rutherford Appleton Laboratory (RAL), Didcot, OX11 0QX, UK
m
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL), Berkeley, CA 94720-8099, USA
n
South Dakota Science and Technology Authority (SDSTA), Sanford Underground Research Facility, Lead, SD 57754-1700, USA
o
University of Liverpool, Department of Physics, Liverpool L69 7ZE, UK
p
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (FNAL), Batavia, IL 60510-5011, USA
q
University of Edinburgh, SUPA, School of Physics and Astronomy, Edinburgh EH9 3FD, UK
r
Brandeis University, Department of Physics, Waltham, MA 02453, USA
s
University of California, Berkeley, Department of Physics, Berkeley, CA 94720-7300, USA
t
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), Livermore, CA 94550-9698, USA
u
University of Oxford, Department of Physics, Oxford OX1 3RH, UK
v
Yale University, Department of Physics, New Haven, CT 06511-8499, USA
w
Laboratório de Instrumentação e Fı́sica Experimental de Partı́culas (LIP), University of Coimbra, P-3004 516 Coimbra, Portugal
x
Washington University in St. Louis, Department of Physics, St. Louis, MO 63130-4862, USA
y
University of Alabama, Department of Physics & Astronomy, Tuscaloosa, AL 34587-0324, USA
z
Pennsylvania State University, Department of Physics, University Park, PA 16802-6300, USA
aa
University of South Dakota, Department of Physics & Earth Sciences, Vermillion, SD 57069-2307, UK
ab
Northwestern University, Department of Physics & Astronomy, Evanston, IL 60208-3112, USA
ac
University of Rochester, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Rochester, NY 14627-0171, USA
ad
University of Bristol, H.H. Wills Physics Laboratory, Bristol, BS8 1TL, UK
ae
Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL), Upton, NY 11973-5000, USA
af
University of California, Santa Barbara, Department of Physics, Santa Barbara, CA 93106-9530, USA
ag
University of Massachusetts, Department of Physics, Amherst, MA 01003-9337, USA
ah
University at Albany (SUNY), Department of Physics, Albany, NY 12222-1000, USA
ai
Royal Holloway, University of London, Department of Physics, Egham, TW20 0EX, UK
aj
IBS Center for Underground Physics (CUP), Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, KOR
ak
University of Sheffield, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Sheffield S3 7RH, UK
al
Black Hills State University, School of Natural Sciences, Spearfish, SD 57799-0002, USA
am
Texas A&M University, Department of Physics and Astronomy, College Station, TX 77843-4242, USA
an
Case Western Reserve University, Department of Physics, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
f

Abstract
We describe the design and assembly of the LUX-ZEPLIN experiment, a direct detection search for cosmic WIMP
dark matter particles. The centerpiece of the experiment is a large liquid xenon time projection chamber sensitive to
low energy nuclear recoils. Rejection of backgrounds is enhanced by a Xe skin veto detector and by a liquid scintillator
Outer Detector loaded with gadolinium for efficient neutron capture and tagging. LZ is located in the Davis Cavern
at the 4850’ level of the Sanford Underground Research Facility in Lead, South Dakota, USA. We describe the major
subsystems of the experiment and its key design features and requirements.

1. Overview

masses greater than a few GeV. The detector design and
experimental strategy derive strongly from the LUX and
ZEPLIN–III experiments [2, 3]. A Conceptual Design Report and a Technical Design Report were completed in
2015 and 2017, respectively [4, 5]. The projected crosssection sensitivity of the experiment is 1.5 × 10−48 cm2 for
a 40 GeV/c2 WIMP (90% C.L.) [6].
A cutaway drawing of the experiment is shown in Fig. 1.
The LZ TPC monitors 7 active tonnes (5.6 tonnes fiducial) of LXe above its cathode. Ionizing interactions in
the active region create prompt and secondary scintillation
signals (‘S1’ and ‘S2’), and these are observed as photoelectrons (PEs) by two arrays of photomultiplier tubes

In this article we describe the design and assembly of
the LUX-ZEPLIN (LZ) experiment, a search for dark matter particles at the Sanford Underground Research Facility (SURF) in Lead, South Dakota, USA. LZ is capable
of observing low energy nuclear recoils, the characteristic
signature of the scattering of WIMPs (Weakly Interacting Massive Particles). It is hosted in the Davis Campus water tank at SURF, formerly the home of the LUX
experiment[1]. LZ features a large liquid xenon (LXe)
time projection chamber (TPC), a well-established technology for the direct detection of WIMP dark matter for
2

4
3
2
6

1

5

Figure 1: Rendering of the LZ experiment, showing the major detector subsystems. At the center is the liquid xenon TPC (1), monitored
by two arrays of PMTs and serviced by various cable and fluid conduits (upper and lower). The TPC is contained in a double-walled
vacuum insulated titanium cryostat and surrounded on all sides by a GdLS Outer Detector (2). The cathode high voltage connection is made
horizontally at the lower left (5). The GdLS is observed by a suite of 8” PMTs (3) standing in the water (4) which provides shielding for the
detector. The pitched conduit on the right (6) allows for neutron calibration sources to illuminate the detector.

assembled and integrated into the ICV in a surface laboratory cleanroom at SURF, with the ICV outer diameter taking maximal advantage of the available space in the
Yates shaft. The OCV and OD, being larger than the ICV,
cannot be transported underground in monolithic form.
Therefore the OCV is segmented into three flanged components and integrated and sealed in the Davis Campus
water tank, while the OD is subdivided into ten hermetic
AVs. This architecture does not require any underground
titanium welding or acrylic bonding.
Besides the instrumented skin and OD, several other
design choices distinguish LZ from its LUX predecessor.
The cathode HV connection, for example, is made at a
side port on the cryostat, while the PMT cables from the
lower half of the TPC are pulled from the bottom. The
heat exchanger for LXe condensation, evaporation, and
circulation is located in a separate and dedicated cryostat
outside the water tank, with LXe being circulated to and
from the bottom of the detector through vacuum insulated transfer lines. To continuously reject heat from the
LN thermosyphon systems, a cryocooler is installed above
the water tank in the Davis Campus. This eliminates the
need to transport LN to the underground, except during
cryocooler maintenance and repair.
The experimental strategy is driven by the need to control radon, krypton, and neutron backgrounds. Control of
dust on all xenon-wetted parts is essential, since it can be

(PMTs). The nature of the interaction, whether electronic
recoil (‘ER’) or nuclear recoil (‘NR’), is inferred from the
energy partition between S1 and S2. The location of the
event is measured from the drift time delay between S1
and S2 (z coordinate) and from the S2 spatial distribution
(x and y coordinates). The TPC is housed in an inner
cryostat vessel (ICV), with a layer of ‘skin’ LXe acting as a
high voltage stand-off. The skin is separately instrumented
with PMTs to veto gamma and neutron interactions in
this region. The ICV is suspended inside the outer cryostat vessel (OCV), cooled by a set of LN thermosyphons,
and thermally isolated by an insulating vacuum. Both the
ICV and OCV are fabricated from low radioactivity titanium [7]. The cryostat stands inside the Davis Campus
water tank, which provides shielding from laboratory gammas and neutrons. An additional set of PMTs immersed
in the water observe an Outer Detector (OD) comprised of
acrylic vessels (AVs) surrounding the cryostat. The AVs
contain organic liquid scintillator loaded with Gadolinium
(GdLS) for efficient neutron and gamma tagging. The water tank and OD are penetrated by various TPC services,
including vacuum insulated conduits for LXe circulation,
instrumentation cabling, neutron calibration guide tubes,
and the cathode high voltage (HV) connection.
One goal of the experimental architecture is to minimize the amount of underground fabrication and assembly of the various detector sub-systems. The LZ TPC is
3

an important source of radon. Kr is removed from the vendor supplied xenon using an off-site charcoal chromatography facility. This purification step takes place prior to the
start of underground science operations. Gamma backgrounds are highly suppressed by the self-shielding of the
TPC, and by careful control and selection of detector materials. Neutrons from spontaneous fission and alpha capture on light nuclei are efficiently tagged and vetoed by
the OD and skin.
2. The Xenon Detector: TPC and Skin
The Xenon Detector is composed of the TPC and its
Xe Skin Veto companion. The central TPC contains 7
tonnes of active LXe which constitutes the WIMP target.
This volume measures approximately 1.5 m in diameter
and height, and is viewed by two arrays of PMTs. The
liquid phase produces prompt S1 pulses. This is topped by
a thin layer of vapor (8 mm thick) where delayed S2 electroluminescence light is produced from ionization emitted
across the surface. Around and underneath the TPC, the
Xe Skin detector contains an additional ∼2 tonnes of liquid, also instrumented with PMTs. This space is required
for dielectric insulation of the TPC but it constitutes an
anti-coincidence scintillation detector in its own right. An
overview of the Xenon Detector is shown in Fig. 2.
The design of the Xenon Detector optimizes: i) the
detection of VUV photons generated by both S1 and S2,
through carefully chosen optical materials and sensors both
in the TPC and the Xe Skin; and ii) the detection of ionization electrons leading to the S2 response, through carefully
designed electric fields in the various regions of the TPC.
The hardware components involved in the transport and
detection of photons and of electrons in the detector are
described in Sections 2.1 and 2.3. Section 2.4 describes the
flow and the monitoring of the LXe fluid itself.
2.1. Optical Performance of the TPC
Both the S1 and the S2 signals produced by particle
interactions consist of vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) photons
produced in the liquid and gas phases, respectively. It is
imperative to optimize the detection of these optical signals. For the S1 response, the goal is to collect as many
VUV photons as possible, as this determines the threshold of the detector. This is achieved primarily by the
use of high quantum efficiency (QE) PMTs optimized for
this wavelength region, viewing a high-reflectance chamFigure 2: The assembled Xenon Detector. Upper panel labels: 1ber covered in PTFE, and by minimizing sources of photon
Top PMT array; 2-Gate-anode and weir region (liquid level); 3-Side
extinction in all materials. Good photocathode coverage
skin PMTs (1-inch); 4-Field cage; 5-Cathode ring; 6-Reverse field
is also essential. For the S2 response, the gain of the elecregion; 7-Lower side skin PMTs (2-inch); 8-Dome skin PMTs (2inch). Lower panel photo by Matthew Kapust, Sanford Underground
troluminescence process makes it easier to collect enough
Research Facility.
photons even at the lowest energies, and the main design
driver is instead to optimize the spatial resolution, especially for peripheral interactions.
detection of the VUV luminescence. The “-22” variant was
The TPC PMTs are 3–inch diameter Hamamatsu R11410–
tuned for LZ in particular: both for ultra-low radioactiv22, developed for operation in the cold liquid xenon and
ity and for resilience against spurious light emission ob4

served at low temperature in previous variants [8]. The
average cold QE is 30.9% after accounting for the dual
photoelectron emission effect measured for xenon scintillation [9]. Key parameters were tested at low temperature
for all tubes, including pressure and bias voltage resilience,
gain and single photoelectron response quality, afterpulsing and dark counts. These are critical parameters that
directly influence the overall performance of the detector.
The procurement, radioassay and performance test campaign lasted for nearly three years. The PMTs are powered by resistive voltage divider circuits attached to the
tubes inside the detector. The voltage ladder is that recommended by Hamamatsu, using negative bias to extract
the signal near ground potential (two independent cables
are used for signal and bias). The nominal operating gain
of the PMTs is 3.5 × 106 measured at the end of the signal
cables.

ated in the TPC. These are shown in Fig. 3. An upwardlooking “bottom” array immersed in the liquid contains
241 units arranged in close-packed hexagonal pattern. A
downward-looking “top” array located in the gas phase
features 253 units arranged in a hybrid pattern that transitions from hexagonal near the center to circular at the
perimeter. This design was chosen to optimize the position reconstruction of the S2 signal for interactions near
the TPC walls, a leading source of background in these
detectors. The structural elements of the arrays are made
from low-background titanium. These include a thin plate
reinforced by truss structures with circular cut-outs to
which the individual PMTs are attached. In the bottom
array this plate sits at the level of the PMT windows.
The exposed titanium is covered with interlocking PTFE
pieces to maximize VUV reflectance. The PMTs are held
by Kovar belts near their mid-point and attached to this
plate by thin PEEK rods. In the top array the structural plate is located at the back of the tubes, and the
gaps between PMT windows are covered with more complex interlocking PTFE pieces secured to the back plate.
The array designs ensure that mechanical stresses induced
by the thermal contraction of PTFE and other materials
does not propagate significantly to the PMT envelopes. A
number of blue LEDs (Everlight 264-7SUBC/C470/S400)
are installed behind plastic diffusers between PMTs at the
face of both arrays. These are used to help optimize and
calibrate the PMT gains and the timing response of the
detector. The assembly and transport of the PMT arrays
required a robust QA process to prevent mechanical damage, dust contamination, and radon-daughter plate-out.
At the center of this program were specially-designed hermetic enclosures that protected the arrays during assembly, checkout, transport and storage until assembly into
the TPC at SURF.
A key element of the optical systems is the ∼20 km
of cabling used for PMT and sensor readout. A 50-Ohm
coaxial cable from Axon Cable S.A.S. (part no. P568914Aˆ)
was selected for electrical and radioactivity performance.
This cable has a copper-made inner conductor and braid,
and extruded FEP insulator and outer sleeve (1.3-mm
nominal diameter). The 12 m span from the detector
to the external feed-throughs means that signal attenuation, dispersion and cross-talk are important considerations. The individual cables were pre-assembled into bundles which are routed together through two conduits that
carry the cables from the top and bottom of the detector.
An additional consideration is the potential for radon emanation. This is especially important for the fraction of
the cabling located near room temperature. Low intrinsic
radioactivity of the cable materials can be easily achieved,
but dust and other types of contamination trapped within
the fine braid during manufacture can be problematic. We
developed additional cleanliness measures with Axon to
mitigate this and have opted for a jacketed version which
acts as a further radon barrier. In addition, the xenon
flow purging the cable conduits is directed to the inline

Figure 3: Arrays of R11410–22 PMTs viewing the TPC. Upper panel:
front view of the top PMT array within its assembly and transportation enclosure. Note the circular PMT arrangement at the periphery transitioning to compact hexagonal towards the center, and the
coverage of non-sensitive surfaces by interlocking pieces of highly
reflective PTFE. Photo by Matthew Kapust, Sanford Underground
Research Facility. Lower panel: Back view of bottom array PMTs
in hexagonal arrangement, showing cable connections and routing
as well as 18 2-inch dome PMTs, which are part of the skin veto
system. Also visible are the titanium support trusses and the LXe
distribution lines. Most surfaces are covered in PTFE to aid light
collection.

Two PMT arrays detect the xenon luminescence gener5

radon-removal system described in Sec. 3.2.
After the PMTs, the next main optical component of
the detector is the PTFE that defines the field cage and
covers the non-sensitive detector components. The optical
performance of the detector depends strongly on its VUV
reflectivity – VUV photons reflect several times off PTFE
surfaces before detection – and the radiopurity of this material is also critical due to its proximity to the active volume. We identified both the PTFE powder and process
that optimized radiological purity and VUV reflectivity in
liquid xenon during a long R&D campaign [10, 11]. The
PTFE selected was Technetics 8764 (Daiken M17 powder),
whose reflectivity when immersed in LXe we measured as
0.973 (>0.971 at 95% C.L.). Our data are best fitted by
a diffuse-plus-specular reflection model for this particular
material, which was tested using the procedures described
in Ref. [10]. Most PTFE elements were machined from
moulds of sintered material, while thinner elements are
‘skived’ from cast cylinders manufactured from the same
powder.
Other factors influence the photon detection efficiency
(PDE) for S1 and S2 light in the TPC. These include photon absorption by the electrode grids (wires and ring holders) and absorption by impurities in the liquid bulk. With
realistic values for these parameters our optical model predicts a photon detection efficiency of around 12% for S1
light.
The optical design of the S2 signal is optimized for
robust reconstruction of low energy events at the edge of
the TPC, in particular from the decay of Rn daughters deposited on the field cage wall, termed “wall events”. These
events may suffer charge loss, thus mimicking nuclear recoils [12]. If mis-reconstructed further into the active region, they can be a significant background. Our aim is
to achieve ∼106 :1 rejection for this event topology in the
fiducial volume. A detailed study of this issue led to the
adoption of a circular PMT layout near the detector edge,
with the final PMT row overhanging the field cage inner
walls, an optimized distance between the top PMT array and the liquid surface, and an absorbing optical layer
(Kapton foil) covering the lateral conical wall in the gas
phase.

pathology, the LZ field cage is designed to optically isolate
the skin from the TPC.
The side region of the skin contains 4 cm of LXe at
the top, widening to 8 cm at cathode level for increased
standoff distance. This is viewed from above by 93 1–inch
Hamamatsu R8520-406 PMTs. These are retained within
PTFE structures attached to the external side of the field
cage, located below the liquid surface. At the bottom of
the detector a ring structure attached to the vessel contains a further 20 2–inch Hamamatsu R8778 PMTs viewing upward into this lateral region, as shown in Fig. 4.

Figure 4: Upper panel: CAD section of the TPC below the cathode
showing the location of the 2” bottom side skin (1) and lower dome
(2) PMTs. Lower panel: Photograph showing the PTFE panelling
attached to the ICV that ensures high reflectance in the skin region
and the lower side skin PMT ring at the bottom of the vessel.

The dome region of the skin at the bottom of the detector is instrumented with an additional 18 2–inch R8778
PMTs. These are mounted horizontally below the bottom
array, with 12 looking radially outward and 6 radially inward. To enhance light collection, all PMTs in that region
and array truss structures are dressed in PTFE. Moreover,
PTFE tiles line the ICV sides and bottom dome. To attach
the PTFE lining, low profile titanium buttons designed to
minimize field effects were epoxied to the ICV wall with
MasterBond EP29LPSP cryogenic epoxy. Holes were machined into the PTFE tiles to fit around the buttons, and
PTFE washers were attached to the buttons with PTFE
screws to secure the tiles in place. These are visible in
Fig. 4.

2.2. The Xe Skin Detector
An important component of the Xenon Detector is the
Xe Skin, the region containing around 2 tonnes of LXe
between the field cage and the inner cryostat vessel. A
primary motivation for this liquid is to provide dielectric insulation between these two elements. In addition
to its electrical standoff function, it is natural to instrument this region for optical readout so that it can act as
a scintillation-only veto detector, especially effective for
gamma-rays. Also, if the skin were not instrumented,
light from particle interactions or electrical breakdown in
this region could leak in to the TPC unnoticed and create
difficult background topologies. To further suppress this
6

2.3. TPC Electrostatic Design

at the core of the feed-through system mounted on top
of the water tank. The space between them is continuously pumped to provide a vacuum guard, monitored by
a Residual Gas Analyzer. Located at room temperature
and far from the detector, a leak-tight seal to the xenon
space can be reliably achieved and the feed-through materials are not a radioactivity concern. Another key feature
of the cathode HV system is the reliance on a single span
of polyethylene cable (Dielectric Sciences SK160318), connecting the power supply all the way to the cathode in the
liquid xenon many meters away. This 150 kV-rated cable
features a conductive polyethylene sheath and center core
and contains no metal components, avoiding differential
contraction and thermal stress issues, and precluding the
appearance of insulation gaps between the dielectric and
the sheath, which contract equally. The HV line ends in
a complex voltage-grading structure near the cathode grid
ring where the conductive sheath splays away. This grades
the potential along the dielectric, preventing very high field
regions inside the detector. The maximum field in the liquid xenon is 35 kV/cm. This voltage grading system ends
in a bayonet connector that allows rapid engagement to
the cathode ring during installation, minimizing exposure
of the detector to radon.
Inside the ICV there is a significant insulation standoff distance of 4–8 cm between the field cage and the inner
vessel, and there is no instrumentation or cabling installed
along the length of the skin region, where the field is high
and the possibility of discharges and stray light production
would be concerning. This region is instead optimized for
optical readout, becoming an integral part of the LZ veto
strategy.
The drift region is 145.6 cm long between cathode and
gate electrodes, and 145.6 cm in diameter, enclosed by a
cylindrical field cage which defines the optical environment
for scintillation light and shapes the electric field for electron transport. The field cage is constructed of 58 layers
of PTFE, which provides insulation and high reflectivity,
with a set of embedded titanium electrode rings. The layers are 25 mm tall, the Ti rings 21 mm tall, and each layer
of PTFE is azimuthally segmented 24 times. Due to their
proximity to the active volume, these are critical materials
for LZ. The metal rings are made from the same batch of
titanium used for the cryostat [7] (the PTFE is described
above). A key design driver was to achieve a segmented
field cage design: to prevent the excessive charge accumulation observed in continuous PTFE panels, and to better
cope with the significant thermal contraction of PTFE between ambient and low temperature. The field cage embeds two resistive ladders connecting the metal rings, each
with two parallel 1 GΩ resistors per section (the first step
has 1 GΩ in parallel with 2 GΩ to tune the field close to
the cathode ring). This ladder ensures a vertical field with
minimal ripple near the field cage.
The lower PMT array cannot operate near the high
potential of the cathode and so a second, more compact
ladder is required below that electrode. This reverse field

The S2 signature detected from particle interactions
in the liquid xenon comes from the transport of ionization electrons liberated by the recoiling nucleus or electron, and their subsequent emission into the gas phase
above the liquid, where the signal is transduced into a
second VUV pulse via electroluminescence. Great care is
required to ensure that the various electric field regions
in the detector achieve this with high efficiency and with
low probability for spurious responses. The LZ detector
is instrumented as a traditional three-electrode two-phase
detector, with cathode and gate wire-grid electrodes establishing a drift field in the bulk of the liquid, and a separate
extraction and electroluminescence region established between the gate and an anode grid. The former sits 5 mm
below the surface and the latter is 8 mm into the gas. The
nominal operating pressure of the detector is 1.8 bara. At
nominal fields, each electron emitted into the gas generates
∼820 electroluminescence photons.
The nominal 300 V/cm drift field established in the
active region of the detector requires application of an
operating voltage of −50 kV to the cathode grid, which
allows LZ to meet its baseline performance for particle
discrimination. The design goal is −100 kV, the maximum operating voltage for the system. The system to
deliver the HV to the cathode grid contains some of the
highest fields in the detector. The HV is delivered from
the power supply (Spellman SL120N10, 120 kV) via a
room-temperature feed-through and into a long vacuuminsulated conduit entering the detector at the level of the
cathode grid, as shown in Fig. 5. Most of the system was
tested to −120 kV in liquid argon, except for the flexible
component connecting the grading structure to the cathode, for which a similarly-shaped part was tested in liquid
argon to surface fields 30% higher than those needed to
meet the design goal.

Figure 5: The interface of the high voltage system with the cathode.
1-Polyethylene high voltage cable; 2-LXe displacer; 3-LXe space; 4Stress cone; 5-Grading rings.

The cable enters the xenon space through two o-rings
7

Figure 6: The electron extraction region assembly on the loom. 1-Anode grid; 2-Gate grid. During TPC operations the anode is above the
LXe surface and the gate is below. The liquid level is registered to this assembly by three weir spillovers.

region (RFR) contains only 8 layers with two parallel 5 GΩ
resistors per section, and terminates 13.7 cm away at a
bottom electrode grid which shields the input optics of
the PMTs from the external field.
The electrode grids are some of the most challenging
components of the experiment, both to design and to fabricate. Mechanically, these are very fragile elements that
nonetheless involve significant stresses and require very
fine tolerances for wire positioning. Besides optimizing
the conflicting requirements of high optical transparency
and mechanical strength, electrical resilience was an additional major driver – spurious electron and/or light emission from such electrodes is a common problem in noble
liquid detectors [13, 14].
The anode and gate grids are depicted in Fig. 6. All
grids are made from 304 stainless steel ultra-finish wire [15]
woven into meshes with a few mm pitch using a custom
loom. Key parameters of the four LZ grids are listed in
Table 1. Each wire is tensioned with 250 g weights on both
ends, and the mesh is glued onto a holder ring. The glue,
MasterBond EP29LPSP cryogenic epoxy, is dispensed by
a computer-controlled robotic system. It includes acrylic
beads that prevent external stresses from being transferred
to the wire crossings. A second metal ring captures the
glued region, and the tensioning weights are released after
curing. This woven mesh has several advantages over wires
stretched in a single direction. The load on the ring set is
azimuthally uniform and purely radial, allowing the mass
of the rings to be minimized. The region of non-uniform
field near the wires is smaller for a mesh, which improves
the uniformity and hence energy resolution obtained in
the S2 channel. Finally, a mesh grid has lower field transparency than stretched wires, resulting in a more uniform
overall drift field. To preserve high S2 uniformity, it is important that the woven mesh have uniform wire spacing.
The loom design included several features to achieve high
uniformity during fabrication, and great care was taken in
subsequent grid handling to avoid displacing wires.

◦

Table 1: TPC electrode grid parameters (all 90 woven meshes).

Electrode

Voltage

Diam.

Pitch

Num.

(kV)

(µm)

(mm)

Anode

+5.75

100

2.5

1169

Gate

−5.75

75

5.0

583

Cathode

−50.0

100

5.0

579

Bottom

−1.5

75

5.0

565

At the top of the detector, the electron extraction and
electroluminescence region, which contains the gate-anode
system, is one of its most challenging aspects (see Fig. 7.)
It establishes the high fields that extract electrons from the
liquid and then produce the S2 light. The quality of the S2
signal is strongly dependent on both the small- and largescale uniformity achieved in this region. In particular, the
anode contains the finest mesh of any LZ grid (2.5 mm
pitch) as this drives the S2 resolution.
An important consideration was the electrostatic deflection of the gate-anode system. We have directly measured the deflection of the final grids as a function of
field using a non-contact optical inspection method. This
matches expectations from electrostatic and mechanical
modeling, and predicts a ∼1.6 mm decrease in the 13 mm
gap at the 11.5 kV nominal operating voltage. As a consequence the field in the gas phase varies from 11.5 kV/cm
at the center to 10.1 kV/cm at the edge. The combined
effect of field increase and gas gap reduction increases
the S2 photon yield by 5% at the center. This effect
can be corrected in data analysis. The gate wires sustain the strongest surface fields of any cathodic element
in the detector (≃52 kV/cm, with no grid deflection, and
≃58 kV/cm with 1.6 mm combined gate/anode deflection).
A major QA program was implemented to ensure the
high quality of the grids throughout manufacture, cleaning, storage and transport, and to prevent damage and
8

ICV and return liquid to the purification circuit through
a common vacuum-insulated transfer line.
A variety of sensors monitor the behavior and performance of the TPC. Six Weir Precision Sensors (WPS) measure the liquid level to within ≈20 µm in the gate-anode
region. An additional WPS is installed in the lower dome
to monitor filling and draining of the detector. Long level
sensors (LLS) are installed in the LXe tower for providing
information during detector filling and for monitoring during normal operation. RF loop antennae (LA) and acoustic sensors (AS) monitor the electrostatic environment of
the detector during electrode biasing and thereafter during operation. The combination of WPS and AS sensors
will also be used to detect disturbances of the fluid system
and especially the liquid surface, such as bubbling or dripping. These will be aided by dedicated resistors installed
in the bottom array that will be used to create bubbles in
the LXe so that their signature can be characterized. At
the top of the detector, a hexapod structure connects the
top PMT array to the ICV lid through six displacement
sensors, allowing the displacement and tilt between these
two elements to be measured to within 0.1 degrees. This is
especially important to prevent major stresses arising during cool-down of the TPC. Finally, PT100 thermometers
are distributed at both ends of the detector. By design, all
sensors and their cabling are excluded from the side skin
region and other high electric field regions. All sensors
are read out by dedicated electronics attached to flanges
enclosed in the signal breakout boxes.

Figure 7: The electron extraction and electroluminescence region.
1-TPC PMT; 2-Anode grid; 3-Gate grid; 4-Weir; 5-Xe Skin PMT.

dust contamination. A key feature of this program was
a series of measurements of the high voltage behavior in
Xe gas of 1/10th scale and full scale prototype grids, and
the final cathode, gate and anode grids. Emission of single electrons to a rate as low as ∼Hz was measured via an
S2-like electroluminescent signal with PMTs. These measurements confirmed earlier work [14] showing that electron emission is strongly reduced by passivation, thus the
production gate grid was passivated in citric acid for 2
hours at ∼125◦ F at AstroPak [16].

3. Cryogenics and Xe Handling
3.1. Cryostat and cryogenics
The Xenon Detector and its LXe payload are contained
in the Inner Cryostat Vessel. The Outer Cryostat Vessel
provides its vacuum jacket. As shown in Fig. 8, the OCV
is supported at the bottom by three legs. The same assembly provides shelves for the GdLS AVs located underneath the OCV. The ICV is suspended from the top head
of the OCV with a mechanism enabling its levelling from
above. Three long tubes run vertically to deploy calibration sources into the insulating vacuum space between the
vessels (see Sec. 5). Both vessels were designed in compliance with the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code
Section VIII Div. 1.
The ICV consists of a top head and a bottom vessel
connected by a large flange near the top. The maximum
outer diameter of the ICV is constrained by the crosssection of the Yates shaft. Its tapered shape is to reduce
the electric field near the cathode. The TPC structure is
anchored to the bottom of the ICV through six dedicated
ports in the dished end. Three angled ports below the
main flange are provided for the LXe weir drain return
lines. Two ports at the top head and the central port at
the bottom are for the PMT and instrumentation cables.
The high voltage port has been machined on the inside to

2.4. Fluid Systems and Sensors
Purified and sub-cooled LXe is prepared by the LXe
tower and delivered to the Xenon Detector through two
vacuum-insulated supply lines that connect at the ICV
bottom center flange (see Sec. 3.2). One line flushes the
lower dome and side skin, the other fans out through a
manifold into seven PTFE tubes that penetrate the lower
PMT array and supply LXe to the TPC. The fluid returns
to the external purification system by spilling over three
weirs that establish the liquid surface height. The weirs
have 23.3 cm circumference, are uniformly spaced in azimuth around the top of the TPC, and are mounted to the
gate grid ring so that the liquid level is well registered to
the location of the gate and anode grids. The weirs drain
through three tubes that penetrate the ICV in the side
skin region and descend in the insulating vacuum space.
The three lines are ganged together near the bottom of the
9

form a curvature minimizing the electric field around the
cathode HV feed-through. Five plastic blocks are attached
to the tapered part of the ICV wall to prevent the ICV
from swinging during a seismic event.
The OCV consists of three segments in order to fit the
largest into the conveyance of the Yates shaft. A port in
the center of the top head hosts the low energy neutron
source deployed in a large tungsten “pig” (see Sec. 5). A
reinforcing ring allows the top AVs to rest on the OCV
head.
The entire cryostat assembly is made out of a carefully
selected ultra-radiopure Grade-1 titanium sourced from a
single titanium supplier [7]. After a comprehensive material search campaign, a 5 metric ton Titanium Gr-1 slab
was procured from Timet and used to fabricate all the
stock material required for the cryostat. Initially it was
cut into three pieces in order to roll the plates with multiple thicknesses, forge all the flanges, and the ports and
to draw the welding wires. The ICV and OCV were fabricated from this material at Loterios in Milan, Italy (see
Fig. 8). The cleaning and etching of the ICV and OCV is
described in Sec. 8.
The ICV is maintained at its operating temperature
by a set of closed-loop thermosyphon heat pipes utilizing
nitrogen as the process fluid. The thermosyphons deliver
heat from the ICV to the Cryogen On Wheels (COW), a
bath of LN located above the water tank in the Davis Cavern. A cryocooler, model SPC-1 from DH industries, recondenses the boil-off nitrogen from the COW and transfers the heat to the chilled water system. During cryocooler maintenance and repair, the COW can be filled
by transporting LN to the Davis Cavern from the surface.
Four 450 liter storage dewars located underground, act as
an intermediate LN repository to enable this mode of operation.
Six copper coldheads are bolted to welded titanium
fins on the ICV exterior and are serviced by three thermosyphon lines. The coldheads are placed at a height
just below the LXe level. The cooling power of each thermosyphon is set by adjusting the amount of process nitrogen in each circuit. Fine adjustment is provided by PIDcontrolled trim heaters located on each coldhead. Two additional thermosyphon circuits remove heat from the LXe
tower (see Sec. 3.2).
The total heat budget of the experiment is estimated
to be 700 W. The largest contributing item, at 349 W, is
due to the inefficiency of the primary two-phase xenon circulation heat exchanger. The thermosyphon trim heaters
and the heat leak into the ICV each account for about
115 W.

3

4

1

2

5

Figure 8: The ICV and OCV during a test assembly at Loterios in
Italy, prior to cleaning and etching. The ICV is suspended from the
top dome of the OCV. 1-ICV; 2-middle section OCV; 3-top dome
section OCV; 4-ICV weir drain port; 5-OCV cathode high voltage
port.

detector with a TPC outgassing campaign described in
Sec. 7. The electron lifetime goal is 800 µs, sufficient to
drift charge from the cathode to the anode while suffering
an acceptable signal reduction factor of 1/e.
An overview of the system is shown in Fig. 9. Xe
gas is pumped through a hot zirconium getter at a design flow rate of 500 standard liters per minute (SLPM),
taking 2.4 days to purify the full 10 tonne Xe inventory
in a single pass. The getter, model PS5-MGT50-R from
SAES [17], operates at 400 ◦ C. For thermal efficiency, the
getter features a heat exchanger to couple the inlet and
outlet Xe gas streams, substantially reducing the 3 kW
heat burden at 500 SLPM. A pre-heater ensures that the
gas strikes the getter bed at the operating temperature.
Besides electronegative removal, the getter bed also serves
as a permanent repository for the tritium and 14 C radiolabeled methane species that calibrate the beta decay response of the TPC (see Sec. 5).
Circulation flow is established by two all-metal diaphragm

3.2. Online Xe handling and purification
The online Xe purification system continuously removes
electronegative impurities from the Xe while also providing some measure of Rn removal and control. Rejection
of electronegatives begins during the final assembly of the
10

Storage and Recovery
Getter

Radon Removal

Compressors
Cable
Breakout

Cable
Breakout

Xe Vapor

HX/
Gas Gap
Cryovalves

Vacuum

LXe-TPC

LXe Skin

Cable
Stand
Pipe

Weir Drain Pipe

Reservoir

2 Phase HX

Weir

Sub Cooler

Liquid
Xenon
Tower

Cathode
High
Voltage

TPCPTFE
Walls
LXe Skin
Flow
Restrictor

Water Tank

Figure 9: Overview of the online Xe purification system. LXe in the Xenon Detector (right) spills over a weir drain and flows horizontally to
the Liquid Xenon tower, which stands outside the water tank. It is vaporized in a two phase heat exchanger, pumped through a hot zirconium
getter, and returned to the detector after condensing. Cryovalves control the flow of LXe between the LXe tower and the Xenon Detector. A
radon removal system treats Xe gas in the cable conduits and breakout feed-throughs before sending it to the compressor inlet.

gas compressors, model A2-5/15 from Fluitron [18]. The
two compressors operate in parallel, each capable of 300
SLPM at 16 PSIA inlet pressure. The system operates
with one compressor at reduced flow rate during periodic maintenance. The total achieved gas flow is trimmed
by a bellows-sealed bypass proportional valve, model 808
from RCV. Both circulation compressors have two stages,
each featuring copper seals plated onto stainless steel diaphragms. All-metal sealing technology was chosen to
limit radon ingress from air.
The LXe tower is a cryogenic device standing on the
floor of the Davis Cavern outside the water tank and at a
height somewhat below the Xenon Detector. Its primary
purpose is to interface the liquid and gaseous portions of
the online purification circuit and to efficiently exchange
heat between them. There are four vessels in the tower:
the reservoir vessel, the two-phase heat exchanger (HEX),
the subcooler vessel, and the subcooler HEX.
The reservoir vessel collects LXe departing the Xenon
Detector via the weir system. It features a standpipe construction to decouple its liquid level from that in the weir
drain line. LXe flows from the bottom of the reservoir
into the two-phase HEX, where it vaporizes after exchanging heat with purified Xe gas returning from the getter.
The two-phase HEX is an ASME-rated brazed plate device made by Standard Xchange consisting of corrugated

stainless steel. On its other side, condensing LXe flows into
the subcooler vessel and subcooler HEX. The vessel separates any remaining Xe gas from the LXe, while the HEX
cools the LXe to below its saturation temperature. The
HEX consists of three isolated elements: the LXe volume,
an LN thermosyphon coldhead cooled to 77 K, and a thin
thermal coupling gap. The power delivered to the LXe can
be varied from 90 W and 480 W by adjusting the composition of the He/N2 gas mixture in the gap. An additional
thermosyphon coldhead integrated with the reservoir removes excess heat during cooldown and operations. Both
the reservoir and the subcooler vessels are equipped with
LXe purity monitors (LPMs) to monitor electronegatives
entering and exiting the Xenon Detector. Each LPM is
a small, single-phase TPC which drifts free electrons over
a distance, and measures the attenuation of the electrons
during that transit.
LXe flows between the LXe tower and the Xenon Detector through three vacuum insulated transfer lines that
run across the bottom of the Davis Cavern water tank.
Two lines connect to the bottom of the ICV and supply
sub-cooled LXe to the TPC and skin regions of the Xenon
Detector. The third line returns LXe from the ICV weir
drain system to the reservoir. The lines are constructed
by Technifab with an integrated vacuum insulation jacket.
They are further insulated from the water by an additional
11

vacuum shell. Cryogenic control valves from WEKA regulate the LXe flow in each of the three lines.
Conduits connect to the ICV at its lower flange and
upper dome to service PMT and instrumentation cables to
the TPC. The lower conduit, which is vacuum insulated
and filled with LXe, travels across the water tank floor,
penetrates its side wall, and mates with a vertical LXe
standpipe. Its cables emerge into gaseous Xe and then
connect to breakout feed-throughs at the standpipe top.
Two upper conduits filled with gaseous Xe connect the
ICV top head to breakout feed-throughs and service cables
to the upper part of the Xenon Detector.
The Xe gas in the cable conduits and breakout feedthroughs are treated for radon removal by a cold synthetic
charcoal column drawing 0.5 SLPM of Xe gas flow. The
system is designed to sequester 222 Rn for three half-lives,
or 12.7 days, allowing 90% of these atoms to decay. The
sequestration is accomplished by a gas chromatographic
process that employs 10 kilograms of synthetic charcoal
(Saratech Spherical Adsorbent, Blücher GmbH) cooled to
190 K [19]. The technique was previously demonstrated in
Ref.[20]. The charcoal was etched in nitric acid and rinsed
with distilled water to reduce its radon emanation rate.
Besides the LPMs, surveillance of the impurity content
of the Xe is also provided by two coldtrap mass spectrometry systems [21, 22]. These devices monitor for the presence of stable noble gas species such as 84 Kr and 40 Ar and
also for electronegatives such as O2 . Ten standard liter
samples of Xe gas are collected and passed through a coldtrap cooled to 77 K, a temperature at which Xe is retained
while many impurities species pass through. The outlet of
the coldtrap is monitored by a Residual Gas Analyzer (an
RGA200 from SRS). The sensitivity for detecting 84 Kr in
Xe is better than 10 parts-per-quadrillion (g/g). The coldtrap is cooled either with a pulse tube refrigerator (model
PT60 from Cryomech Inc.) or with an open flask dewar
of liquid nitrogen. One of these systems is permanently
plumbed to fixed locations in the Xe handling system; the
other acts as a mobile utility system to be deployed as
needed. Both are highly automated and allow for multiple
measurements per day.
To recover the ten tonne Xe inventory to long term
storage, two high pressure gas compressors (Fluitron model
D1-20/120) pump Xe gas into 12 Xe storage packs. The
recovery compressors use the same all-metal diaphragm
technology as the circulation compressors. Each Xe storage pack consist of 12 DOT-3AA-2400 49.1 liter cylinders
sealed with Ceoduex D304 UHP tied diaphragm valves
and ganged together in a steel frame. Each pack weighs
1,800 kg when full. During Xe recovery heat is added to
the LXe by electrical heaters and by softening the insulating vacuum of the lower cable conduit. Two backup diesel
generators are provided in case of a power outage. The
emergency recovery logic is described in Sec. 6.3.
All elements of the online Xe handling system were
cleaned for ultra high vacuum with solvents and rinsed in
de-ionized water. Orbital welds conform to ASME B31.3.

Where possible, stainless steel components have been etched
in citric acid to reduce radon emanation.
3.3. Removal of Kr from Xe
Beta decay of 85 Kr in the LXe is a challenging ER
background source. The acceptable Kr concentration, derived by assuming an isotopic abundance of 85 Kr/Kr ∼
2 × 10−11 , is Kr/Xe < 0.3 parts-per-trillion (g/g). This
concentration is achieved prior to the start of LZ operations by separating trace Kr from the Xe inventory with a
gas charcoal chromatography process.
A total of 800 kg of Calgon PCB activated charcoal is
employed, divided evenly into two columns. The charcoal
was washed with water to remove dust and baked under
an N2 purge for 10 days, ultimately achieving a charcoal
temperature of 150 ◦ C. During processing the Xe inventory is mixed with He carrier gas circulated by a compressor (model 4VX2BG-131 from RIX). The Xe/He mixture
is passed through one of the two charcoal columns at a
pressure of 1.7 bara. Trace Kr reaches the column outlet
first and is directed to an LN-cooled charcoal trap where
it is retained. A Leybold-Oerlikon Roots blower and screw
pump located at the charcoal column outlet then activates,
dropping the column pressure to 10 mbar. This purges the
purified Xe from the column. The Xe is separated from the
He carrier gas by freezing it at 77 K in an LN-cooled heat
exchange vessel. This freezer is periodically warmed to vaporize the Xe ice, and the recovered Xe gas is transferred
at room temperature by a Fluitron Xe recovery compressor
to one of the twelve Xe storage packs described above.
The entire 10 tonne Xe inventory is processed in 16 kg
batches. The chromatographic and Xe purge cycles each
take about 2 hours. Two charcoal columns are employed to
allow processing and column purging to proceed in parallel. A Kr rejection factor greater than 1000 can be achieved
in a single pass through the system; two passes are envisioned to achieve the required concentration. The processing is monitored by a coldtrap Xe mass spectrometry system for quality assurance. After processing, the Xe storage
packs are shipped from SLAC to SURF in preparation for
condensing into the Xenon Detector.
4. Outer Detector
The principal purpose of the Outer Detector is to tag
neutrons scattering events in the TPC. Most neutrons originate from radioactive impurities in material immediately
adjacent to the TPC, such as those from (α,n) processes
on PTFE. The OD is a near-hermetic liquid scintillator
detector designed to capture and tag neutrons within a
time window that allows the signals to be correlated with
the NR in the TPC.
The detection medium for the OD is gadolinium-doped
liquid scintillator contained within segmented acrylic vessels that surround the OCV. Neutrons are detected predominantly through capture on 155 Gd and 157 Gd; a total of
12

Inefficiency (%)

7.9 MeV (155 Gd) or 8.5 MeV (157 Gd) is released in a postcapture cascade of, on average, 4.7 gammas. About 10% of
neutrons capture on hydrogen, emitting a single 2.2 MeV
gamma. Gammas induce scintillation within the LS which
is subsequently collected by the 120 8–inch PMTs that
view the OD from a support system inside the water tank.
To maximize light collection efficiency, there is both a
Tyvek curtain behind, above and below the PMTs, and
a layer of Tyvek surrounding the cryostat.
The OD has been designed to operate with a neutron
detection efficiency of greater than 95%. To optimize this
efficiency, the concentration of Gd was chosen such that
capture on H is sub-dominant. Furthermore, the time between a signal in the TPC and a neutron capture in the OD
impacts the efficiency (see Fig. 10). The level of Gd chosen
for LZ reduces the average capture time of thermal neutrons in liquid scintillator from 200 µs to 30 µs. However,
there is a significant population of neutrons that survive
several times longer than 30 µs. Simulations demonstrate
that neutrons can spend significant time scattering and
thermalizing within the acrylic walls of the OD vessels. To
minimize this effect, the acrylic walls are designed to be as
thin as is structurally possible. Using less acrylic also reduces the number of H-captures. The use of a 500 µs time
window allows for an efficiency of 96.5% for a 200 keV
threshold, while achieving a deadtime of less than 5%.

0 keV
100 keV
200 keV

10
8

Figure 11: The outer detector system in an exploded view. The
four large side vessels are shown in green and the 5 smaller top and
bottom vessels are shown in blue. Also shown are water displacers
in red, and the stainless steel base in grey.

6
4

0.5–inch thick, whereas the flat tops and bottoms are 1–
inch thick for structural reasons. The AVs contain various
penetrations for conduits and cabling. All sheets of acrylic
used for fabrication were tested for optical transmission
and were found to exceed 92% between 400 and 700 nm,
meeting requirements. Acrylic samples were screened with
ICP-MS (see Sec. 8.1)and found to be sufficiently low in
radioactive contaminants.
The liquid scintillator used in the OD consists of a linear alkyl benzene (LAB) solvent doped at 0.1% by mass
with gadolinium. The full chemical make-up of the GdLS
cocktail is shown in Table 2. Gd is introduced into LAB using trans-3-Methyl-2-hexenoic acid (TMHA) as a chelation
agent. Other components are the fluor, 2,5-Diphenyloxazole
(PPO), and a wavelength shifter, 1,4-Bis(2-methylstyryl)benzene (bis-MSB). The emission spectrum of this mix
spans 350 to 540 nm, with peaks at 400 and 420 nm, and
the absorption length in this range is of order 10 m. LAB,
TMHA and PPO are purified in order to remove metallic
and coloured impurities to improve optical transmission;
LAB and TMHA by thin-film distillation and PPO by
water-extraction and recrystallization. For the chelated
Gd product, a self-scavenging method is used to induce

2
0

200

400

600

800
1000
OD Veto Window ( s)

Figure 10: Monte Carlo derived OD inefficiency as a function of veto
window (time between S1 in the TPC and signal in the OD). The
energy thresholds referenced in the legend are for electron recoils.

4.1. Outer Detector systems
A total of ten ultra-violet transmitting (UVT) Acrylic
Vessels have been fabricated by Reynolds Polymer Technology in Grand Junction, Colorado. These consist of four
side vessels, three bottom vessels, two top vessels and a
‘plug‘ which can be removed for photoneutron source deployment, see Fig. 11. The AVs were designed as segmented to allow transport underground and into the water
tank with no acrylic bonding necessary on site. All acrylic
walls for the side AVs are nominally 1–inch thick. For the
top and bottom AVs, the side and domed acrylic walls are
13

precipitation of uranium and thorium isotopes to improve
radiopurity. Twenty-two tonnes of GdLS contained in 150
55-gallon drums are shipped to SURF and transferred into
the AVs through a reservoir. Exposure to air is minimized,
as oxygen, radon and krypton negatively impact the GdLS
performance. The GdLS is bubbled with nitrogen while
in the reservoir in order to remove dissolved oxygen and
maximize the light yield. Furthermore, a light yield test is
performed on each drum of GdLS before transfer into the
AVs. The test apparatus consists of a dark box containing
a radioactive source, one PMT, and a small sample of the
GdLS.
A total of 120 Hamamatsu R5912 8–inch PMTs view
the GdLS and AVs from a Tyvek curtain situated 115 cm
radially from the outer wall of the acrylic (see Fig. 1). The
interaction rate in the OD from radioistopes in the PMT
system is predicted to be only 2.5 Hz due to the shielding
provided by the water gap. The PMTs are arranged in 20
ladders spaced equally around the water tank in φ with 6
PMTs per ladder. Each PMT is held by a ‘spider’ support
and covered by a Tyvek cone.
A dedicated Optical Calibration System (OCS) has
been designed for PMT monitoring and measurement of
the optical properties of the GdLS and acrylic. Thirty
LED duplex optical fibres are mounted with the PMT
supports, with an additional five beneath the bottom AVs
placed specifically to check transmission through the acrylic.
Short, daily calibrations with the OCS will be performed
in order to check the PE/keV yield at the veto threshold,
and weekly calibrations will be used to check PMT gains
and optical properties.
4.2. Performance
The performance of the OD strongly depends on its
event rate. The sources can be divided into internal and
external; internal backgrounds are contamination intrinsic
to the OD, i.e. inside the GdLS; while external sources
can be subdivided again into radioactivity from LZ components and radioactivity from the Davis Cavern itself (see
Table 3).
Radioactive contaminants internal to the GdLS have
been measured through a campaign with an LS Screener, a
small detector containing 23 kg of liquid scintillator viewed
by three low background LZ PMTs, fully described in
Ref. [23]. The LS Screener took data with both loaded
(with Gd) and unloaded (no Gd) samples of the liquid
scintillator that is used in the Outer Detector. The unloaded sample allowed a clear determination of what contaminants were introduced during the Gd-doping process,
as well as a clearer low energy region to allow a measurement of the 14 C concentration, particularly important as
its rate influences the choice of energy threshold. Use of
pulse shape discrimination allowed for efficient separation
of alpha decays from betas and gammas, and constraints
were placed on activity from the 238 U, 235 U and 232 Th
decay-chains, 40 K, 14 C, 7 Be (from cosmogenic activation
of carbon in the LS), 85 Kr and 176 Lu. Some surprising

and significant findings of the LS Screener were the dominance of the rate from nuclides within the 235 U chain, and
the presence of 176 Lu, now known to be introduced when
doping with gadolinium, since neither were observed in
the unloaded LS sample. A more aggressive purification
of the GdLS resulted in a decrease in activity of almost
all contaminants. The new, lower activities were used in
combination with the LS Screener results to predict a rate
of 5.9 Hz above the nominal 200 keV veto threshold for
the OD.
The biggest contribution to the rate in the OD is from
the radioactivity within the Davis Cavern. Contamination
of the cavern walls with on the order of tens of Bq/kg for
40
K, 238 U and 232 Th has been established using dedicated
measurements of the γ-ray flux with a NaI detector [24],
and simulation studies suggest a rate above 200 keV of
27 ± 7 Hz, concentrated in the top and bottom AVs.
With an expected overall rate of ∼50 Hz, the OD can
be expected to operate with an efficiency of 96.5% for a
200 keV threshold. The energy threshold of the OD is
nominally a number of photoelectrons corresponding to
an energy deposit of 200 keV, predicted to be 10 PE by
photon transport simulations. The threshold is chosen to
eliminate the rate from internal 14 C contamination, as it
is a low energy β-decay with an endpoint of 156 keV. The
OD may be operated instead with a 100 keV threshold,
depending on the observed rate, which would decrease the
inefficiency at a window of 500 µs from 3.5% to 2.8%.
The impact of the OD on NR backgrounds is characterized through neutron Monte Carlo simulations. The
total NR background in 1000 livedays is predicted to be
reduced from 12.31 to 1.24 NR counts when the OD and
skin vetoes are applied, with the OD providing most of
the vetoing power. Due to the spatial distribution of these
NRs in the LXe TPC, the OD is necessary to utilize the
full 5.6 tonne fiducial volume.
5. Calibrations
Many attributes of the LZ detector response require
in situ calibration. Calibration goals range from low-level
quantities such as PMT gain and relative timing to highlevel quantities such as models of electron recoil and nuclear recoil response. To these ends, the LZ detector includes significant accommodations for a suite of calibrations. Large-scale accommodations (some visible in Fig. 1)
include three small-diameter conduits to transport external sources to the cryostat side vaccum region, one largediameter conduit to transport large (γ,n) sources to the
cryostat top, and two evacuated conduits to enable neutron propagation from an external neutron generator to
the cryostat side.
5.1. Internal sources
Gaseous sources can mix with the LXe in order to reach
the central active volume, where self-shielding limits cali-

14

Table 2: Chemical components in 1 L of GdLS.

Acronym
LAB
PPO
bis-MSB
TMHA
Gd
GdLS

Molecular Formula
C17.14 H28.28
C15 H11 NO
C24 H22
C9 H17 O2
Gd
C17.072 H28.128 O0.0126 N0.0037 Gd0.0015

Rates are given in the case of the nominal 200 keV threshold.

External
Internal
Total

Component
PMTs & Bases
TPC
Cryostat
OD
Davis Cavern
GdLS

Mass (g)
853.55
3.00
0.015
2.58
0.86
860.0

Table 4: Overview of radioactive nuclide sources planned for LZ
calibration, grouped according to deployment method. A: gaseous
sources released into GXe circulation, B: sealed sources lowered down
small-diameter conduits to cryostat side vacuum, C: (γ,n) sources
requiring dense shielding, lowered down a large-diameter conduit to
the cryostat top, D: DD generator sources, in which neutrons travel
through conduits from the generator, through the water tank and
outer detector.

Table 3: Predictions for the event rate in the Outer Detector.
Type

Molecular Weight (g/mol)
234.4
221.3
310.4
157.2
157.3
233.9

OD Rate (Hz)
0.9
0.5
2.5
8.0
31
5.9
51

A

bration via external gamma sources. The baseline suite of
such ‘internal’ sources is listed in Group A of Table 4.
Long-lived gaseous sources (3 H, 14 C) can be stored as
a pressurized gas, with purified Xe serving as the carrier.
Because the nuclide is long-lived, it must be in a chemical form that can be efficiently removed by the getter (see
Sec. 3.2). The LZ implementation builds on the successful
example of LUX, in which isotopically-labeled CH4 served
as the calibration gas. CH4 was seen to be efficiently removed, as long as it did not contain trace amounts of other
labeled hydrocarbons [25, 26].
The short-lived gaseous sources (83m Kr, 131m Xe, 220 Rn)
are stored in the form of their parent nuclide, which can
be handled and stored in a compact solid form and placed
within ‘generator’ plumbing in which it emanates the calibration daughter. 83 Rb serves as the parent nuclide of
83m
Kr, and is deposited in aqueous solution on high purity, high surface area charcoal before baking (as in [27]).
131
I serves as the parent nuclide of 131m Xe, and is commercially available in a pill form of high Xe emanation efficiency. 228 Th serves as the parent nuclide of 220 Rn, and
is available commercially from Eckert & Ziegler as a thin
electroplated film for optimal Rn emanation. In the LZ
implementation, these generator materials are housed in
transportable and interchangeable plumbing sections (see
Fig. 12). These assemblies contain both a port for material
access and a pair of sintered nickel filter elements (3 nm
pore size, Entegris WG3NSMJJ2) to prevent contamination by the parent nuclide of the active Xe.
Both long-lived and short-lived gaseous sources require
precise dose control on the injected activity, accomplished
via a gas handling system dedicated to injection control.
A specific GXe cylinder supplies the carrier gas to transport small quantities of calibration gas through a series of
high-precision Mass Flow Controllers (Teledyne-Hastings

B

C

D

Nuclide
83m
Kr
131m
Xe
220
Rn
3
H
14
C
241
AmLi
252
Cf
241
AmBe
57
Co
228
Th
22
Na
60
Co
133
Ba
54
Mn
88
YBe
124
SbBe
205
BiBe
206
BiBe
DD
D Ref.

Type
γ
γ
α, β, γ
β
β
(α,n)
n
(α,n)
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
(γ,n)
(γ,n)
(γ,n)
(γ,n)
n
n

Energy [keV]
32.1 , 9.4
164
various
18.6 endpoint
156 endpoint
1500 endpoint (a)
Watt spectrum
11,000 endpoint
122
2615
511,1275
1173 , 1333
356
835
152
22.5
88.5
47
2450
272 → 400

τ1/2
1.83 h
11.8 d
10.6 h
12.5 y
5730 y
432 y
2.65 y
432 y
0.74 y
1.91 y
2.61 y
5.27 y
10.5 y
312 d
107 d
60.2 d
15.3 d
6.24 d
−
−

HFC-D-302B) and volumes of precise pressure measurement (MKS 872). Once a dose of calibration gas has been
isolated, the volume containing the dose is flushed into the
main GXe circulation flow path, either before the getter
for noble-element calibration species or after the getter for
long-lived CH4 -based species.
5.2. External sources
External sources are lowered through three 23.5 mm
ID 6 m long conduits to the vacuum region between the
ICV and OCV. Each conduit is capped by a deployment
system (Fig. 13) which raises and lowers the sources with
final position accuracy of ±5 mm. The position measurement is accomplished via an ILR1181-30 Micro-Epsilon
15

Figure 13: LEFT: One of three external source deployment systems,
including the laser ranging system (top black component) and the
stepper motor and gear/winding assembly (enclosed in a KF50 Tee
at the back). A transparent plate makes visible the region in which
the sources are installed and removed. RIGHT: An external source
assembly, showing the acrylic body, the source region (at bottom),
and the filament connection, black skids, and laser reflector (at top).

up to about 4.6 keV. This range corresponds to the expected energy depositions from 8 B solar neutrino coherent
scattering. Only about one neutron is produced for every
104 gammas emitted, so a significant quantity of gamma
shielding is required (see Fig. 14). The neutrons are quasi
mono-energetic at production (within a few percent) but
undergo additional scatterings before they reach the liquid xenon. The utility of this calibration source is derived
from the endpoint energy the neutron deposits, which simulations indicate will be clearly distinguishable after a few
days of calibration.
A ∼140 kg tungsten shield block is designed to be deployed at the top of LZ via a crane. In the unlikely event
the shield block were to become lodged inside the LZ water
tank, it would be possible to separately remove the conical
structure which contains the gamma source and the Be.

Figure 12: TOP: Three example solid materials containing parent
nuclides that emit daughter calibration gaseous sources. Charcoal
83
dosed with Rb is fixed to the a 1/2-inch VCR plug (1). A gas131
permeable pill (2) containing
I and a disk source (3) of electro228
plated
Th can also be fixed in place. BOTTOM: Photograph of
a typical gaseous source generator. Carrier Xe gas flows from left
to right. The active parent material is stored in the central region
(4), accessed via a 1/2-inch VCR port. This region is bounded by a
pair of filter elements (5) of 3 nm pore size sintered nickel and then
a pair of lockable manual valves for isolation during shipping and
installation.

laser ranger (visible at the top of Fig. 13), supplying live
data for an active feedback protocol to a SH2141-5511
(SANYO DENKO Co) stepper motor. A ∼100 µm nylon
composite filament suspends the sources, rated to a maximum load of 12 kg. The external sources themselves are in
most cases commercial sources (Eckert & Ziegler type R).
A special case is the AmLi source, custom fabricated but
of the same form factor. To enable smooth transport up
and down the conduit, each source is epoxied and encapsulated at the lower end of a 5” long by 0.625” diameter
acrylic cylinder. The top end contains the capsule holder
allowing connection to the filament and includes a ferromagnetic connection rod for recovery in case of filament
breakage.

5.4. Deuterium-deuterium neutron sources
An Adelphi DD-108 deuterium-deuterium (DD) neutron generator produces up to 108 neutrons per second. A
custom upgrade will allow up to 109 n/s. The neutrons
are delivered through the Davis Cavern water tank and
Outer Detector via dedicated neutron conduits. There are
two sets of conduits, one level and one inclined at 20 degrees from the horizontal. Each conduit assembly includes
a 2–inch diameter and a 6–inch diameter path, and all are
filled with water during dark matter search. As shown in
Fig. 14, the generator is permanently mounted on an Ekko
Lift (model EA15A), and surrounded by custom neutron
shielding material. A kinematic mounting plate, located
between the forks of the lift, will bolt to threaded inserts

5.3. Photoneutron sources
A selection of photoneutron (γ,n) sources, including
YBe, 124 SbBe, 204 BiBe and 205 BiBe, are planned to calibrate the nuclear recoil energy range from below 1 keV
88

16

in the concrete floor. This is designed to provide precise,
repeatable positioning.
The DD-108 produces 2450 keV mono-energetic neutrons. This source has already been used by LUX to obtain a precise, in-situ calibration of the low-energy nuclear
recoil response [28]. In addition to this mode of operation,
LZ obtains 272 keV quasi mono-energetic neutrons by reflecting the 2450 keV beam from a deuterium oxide (D2 O)
target. This allows the lowest nuclear recoil energies to be
calibrated with decreased uncertainty.

with neutron capture on Gd, which generates a γ-ray cascade with a total energy between 7.9 and 8.5 MeV, do not
saturate the analog and digital electronics. Such events
generate at most 100 PEs in a single PMT. For muon interactions in the outer detector, a few PMTs may saturate,
depending on the location of the muon track.
The Data Acquisition system (DAQ) is designed to allow LED calibrations of the TPC PMTs in about 10 minutes. This requires an event rate of 4-kHz, resulting in a
∼340 Mb/s total waveform data rate. Monte Carlo simulations predict a total background rate is about 40 Hz.
The background rate between zero and 40 keV is about
0.4 Hz. Due to the maximum drift time of 800 µs in the
TPC, the rate for TPC source calibrations is limited to
150 Hz. A 150 Hz calibration rate results in a 10% probability of detecting a second calibration event within the
drift time of the previous calibration event.
The slow control system is responsible for controlling
and monitoring all LZ systems. It is described in detail in
Sec. 6.3.
6.1. Signal Flow
The processing of the signals generated by the TPC
PMTs is schematically shown in Fig. 15. The TPC and
skin PMTs operate at a negative HV, supplied by the HV
system, using MPOD EDS 20130n 504 and MPOD EDS
20130p 504 HV distribution modules from from WIENER
Power Electronics [29]. HV filters are installed at the HV
flange on the breakout box. The PMT signals leave the
breakout box via a different flange and are processed by
the analog front-end electronics. The amplified and shaped
signals are connected to the DAQ. The digitized data are
sent to Data Collectors and stored on local disks. The
PMTs of the outer-detector system operate at positive HV.
The same type of amplifier used for the TPC and skin
PMTs is also used for the outer-detector PMTs.

Figure 14: LEFT: Brass mockup of the photoneutron source shielding assembly, which will be made of tungsten alloy. The main body
is at top. Depicted below is a conical insert that houses radioactive
source. RIGHT: Rendering of the DD generator in its boron-doped
shielding assembly, all mounted on a movable positioning system.

6. Electronics and Controls
The signal processing electronics, described in detail in
Sec. 6.1, processes the signals from 494 TPC PMTs, 131
skin PMTs, and 120 outer-detector PMTs. The electronics
is designed to ensure a detection efficiency for single photoelectrons (PEs) of at least 90%. The PMT signals are
digitized with a sampling frequency of 100 MHz and 14-bit
accuracy. The gain and shaping parameters of the amplifiers are adjusted to optimize the dynamic range for the
PMTs. The dynamic range for the TPC PMTs is defined
by the requirement that the S2 signals associated with a
full-energy deposition of the 164 keV 131m Xe activation
line do not saturate the digitizers. Larger energy depositions will saturate a number of channels of the top PMT
array, but the size of the S2 signal can be reconstructed
using the S2 signals detected with the bottom PMT array.
The saturation of a few top PMTs for S2 signal will not
impact the accuracy of the position reconstruction. For
the skin PMTs, the dynamic range is defined by the requirement that the skin PMT signals associated with the
interaction of a 511-keV γ-ray in the skin do not saturate
the digitizers. Simulations show that such an interaction
can generate up to 200 PEs in a single PMT, depending
on the location of the interaction. The dynamic range
for the outer-detector PMTs is defined by the requirement
that the size of the outer-detector PMT signals associated

DS Master

Level 1 DS

DAQ Master

DDC-32s
HV Supply

Data Extractors

Low/High Gain Amp
HV Filter

External Triggers

Xenon Space

Data
Collectors

Event Building

PMTs

Figure 15: Schematic of the signal processing of the TPC PMTs.
The TPC and outer-detector PMTs use dual-gain signal processing.
The skin PMTs only utilize the high-gain section of the amplifiers.
The signals are digitized using the DDC-32 digitizer, developed for
LZ in collaboration with SkuTek [30]. Event selection is made by
the Data Sparsification (DS) system [31].

17

Counts (#)

The PMT signals are processed with dual-gain am300
plifiers. The low-gain channel has a pulse-area gain of
four and a 30-ns full width at tenth maximum (FWTM)
250
shaping-time constant. The high-gain channel has a pulse200
area gain of 40 and a shaping time of 60-ns (FWTM). The
high-gain channel is optimized for an excellent single PE
150
response. The shaping times and gains are derived from
one assumption: the DAQ has a usable dynamic range of
100
1.8 V at the input. A 0.2 V offset is applied to the digitizer
50
channels in order to measure signal undershoots of up to
0.2 V. Measurements with prototype electronics and the
100
200
300
400
500
LZ PMTs have shown that the same amplifier parameters
Four sample wide S1 Filter peak output (ADCC)
can be used for all of them. For the TPC and the Outer
Detector PMTs, both high-gain and low-gain channels are
Figure 16: Measurements of the TPC PMT response to a single PE.
digitized; for the skin PMTs, only the high-gain channel
The output of the four-sample wide S1 filter, in units of ADC Counts
(ADCC), is shown.
is digitized.
The top-level architecture of the DAQ system is shown
CPU
Tape
schematically in Fig. 15. The DDC-32s digitizers, evelDAQ 1
DAQM + DQM
Archive
oped for LZ in collaboration with SkuTek [30], continux% of Data
ously digitize the incoming PMT signals and store them
in circular buffers. When an interesting event is detected,
CPU
Data
Event
RAID
RAID
the Data Extractors (DE) collect the information of interDAQ 15
Event Building
(Re)processing
Files
Surface
US DS
est from the DDC-32s. The DEs compress and stack the
Simulations
extracted data using their FPGAs and send the data to
Data
Data Collectors for temporary storage. The Event Builder
(Re)processing
SURF
SURF
RAID
takes the data organized by channels and assembles the
Simulations
UK DS
Underground
Surface
buffers into full event structures for online and offline analysis. The DAQ operation is controlled by the DAQ Master
Figure 17: A schematic of the LZ data flow.
for high-speed operations such as system synchronization
and waveform selection, and by the DAQ Expert ConRedundant connections exist between the surface and
trol/Monitoring system, not shown in Fig. 15, for slow
the
Davis Cavern. A pair of managed 10 Gbs switches is
operations such as running setup/control and operator diinstalled
on the surface and underground. Each switch on
agnostics. The entire system runs synchronously with one
the
surface
is connected via two fibers, travelling through
global clock.
the
Yates
and
the Ross shafts, to the two underground
The performance of the entire signal processing chain
switches.
Since
each link supports 10 Gbs, this configurahas been evaluated in an electronics chain test. Pre-production
tion
can
support
data transfer rates of up to 40 Gbs.
prototypes of the analog and digital as well as signal caA
fraction
of
the
data is analyzed online by the Detecbles of the same type and length as those to be installed
tor
Quality
Monitor
(DQM), running on a dedicated onat SURF were used. The measured response of a fourline
server,
installed
in
the Davis Laboratory. The DQM
sample wide S1 filter is shown in Fig. 16. The measured
applies
elements
of
the
offline analysis to the data being
single photoelectron (PE) efficiency is 99.8%, much better
collected,
in
order
to
monitor
the performance of the dethan the requirement of 90%. The threshold at which the
83m
tector.
For
example,
during
Kr calibrations, the DQM
false-trigger rate is 1 Hz is 43 ADC Counts (ADCC) or
will
monitor
the
electron
life
time
and the energy reso16% of a single PE.
lution. Various detector parameters, such as PMT multiplicity, hit distributions across both PMT arrays, and
6.2. Data Flow and Online Data Quality
trigger rates, will be monitored. If significant deviations
The data flow is schematically shown in Fig. 17. Five
from prior observed patterns are seen, experts will be auevent builders (EB) assemble the events by extracting the
tomatically notified via the slow control system.
relevant information from the Data Collector disks, DAQ1DAQ15. A 10 Gigabit per second (Gbs) line connects the
Data Collectors to the Event Builders. The event files are
stored on the 16 TB local disk array of each EB, before
being transferred to the 192 TB RAID array installed on
the surface. From there, the event files are distributed to
the data-processing centers for offline data processing and
analysis.

6.3. Controls
The Controls system performs supervisory control and
monitoring of all the major subsystems of the experiment,
including cryogenics, fluid handling, detector diagnostic
sensors, high voltage, and electronics monitoring. Not
included in this system are the SURF-managed controls
ensuring personnel safety (for example, oxygen deficiency
18

alarms and sensors). The functionality provided by the
Controls system can be classified in the following four categories: 1) protection against xenon loss and contamination, 2) experiment parameter monitoring and logging, 3)
control over LZ subsystems, and 4) providing the interface
to operators.
In order to minimize risks associated with possible xenon
loss or contamination, instruments and subsystems are divided in two major groups with respect to the perceived
impact of their possible malfunction on the integrity of the
xenon supply. Those where equipment failure or operator
error can lead to xenon loss or contamination are designated “critical” and the rest are “non-critical”. During a
power failure, a combination of UPS and generator power
will provide continuity to the critical components of the
slow control system.
The PLC system provides automatic protection in the
case of an emergency. If the Xe pressure inside the ICV
reaches a threshold value, or if there is an extended power
outage in the Davis Cavern, the Xe compressors will activate and the vaporized xenon will be safely transferred to
the Xe storage packs. In these scenarios Xe transfer occurs
automatically without assistance from a human operator.
Additionally, the PLC is programmed with a set of interlocks to protect the experiment from erroneous operator
commands or equipment failure during routine operations.
The functional diagram of the slow control system and
its interaction with the experiment subsystems and infrastructure is shown in Fig. 18. The core of the slow control
system is composed of three components: (1) the integrated supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA)
software platform Ignition from Inductive Automation [32],
(2) a Siemens SIMATIC S7-410H dual-CPU PLC with Redundant Hot Backup, allowing bumpless transfer from one
active CPU to the backup, and (3) associated I/O modules [33]. Non-critical instruments connect directly to the
Ignition server, typically using MODBUS-TCP over the
slow control local network. Critical instruments are managed by the PLCs, which in turn communicates with the
Ignition server.
The Ignition server provides a single operator interface,
alarm system, and historical record for all slow control instrumentation. It provides authorized users with access to
specific controls. In addition, the Ignition server provides
the scripting engine for experiment automation. Ignition
also provides a GUI for accessing historical data in the
form of plots by local and remote clients. The configuration data (properties of sensors and controls, alarms,
and user preferences) are stored in the local configuration
database.
For critical systems, which include xenon handling,
cryogenics, and grid high voltage, PLCs add an additional
layer between the slow control software and the physical
instruments. This ensures uninterrupted control of critical
instruments and separates the low level logic governed by
PLCs from the higher level operations run by the Ignition
scripting engine.
19

The PLC system is responsible for the automated recovery of xenon in emergency scenarios and must be robust against single-point failures. This begins with the
the Siemens dual-CPU system. The system is powered by
redundant 24 VDC supplies fed by two separate electrical
panels, one of which is supported by an 8 kVA APC Symmetra UPS. Both panels are also supported by backup
diesel powered electrical generator, capable of powering
the PLC system and xenon recovery compressors for the
time required to complete xenon recovery.
Each Siemens CPU has its own connection to a common set of S7-300 I/O Modules, which connect directly
to individual instruments/sensors, as well as to a set of
PROFIBUS-DP Y-links, allowing for redundant control of
PROFIBUS instruments. In either case, redundancy does
not in general extend to the I/O modules and instruments.
However, those instruments critical for xenon recovery are
duplicated to eliminate single-point failures.
Several integrated instruments, including the xenon
compressors, vacuum pump systems, and the liquid nitrogen generator, have their own dedicated PLCs which
function as PROFIBUS slaves to the Master PLC. These
smaller PLCs are either provided and programmed by the
instrument vendor or, in the case of the xenon compressors, built and programmed by LZ.
Each of the four xenon compressors (two circulation
and two recovery) is run by a dedicated Beckhoff CX8031
PLC, which governs compressor startup and shutdown sequences. The PLCs running the two xenon recovery compressors have the extra feature that they are capable of initiating xenon recovery in response to an over-pressure scenario, triggered by xenon pressure transducers connected
directly to each PLC. The intent is that emergency xenon
recovery will be initiated and coordinated by the Master
PLC, with this slave-initiated recovery as a backup.
The choice of Ignition as the software platform for LZ
Controls is based on the wide range of highly customizable,
easy to use core functions and tools for development of efficient and robust SCADA systems. Ignition also comes
with a versatile toolbox for GUI design and a comprehensive library of device drivers supporting most of the hardware used in LZ. One of these drivers supports Siemens
PLCs allowing to export the PLC tags (internal variables).
Devices connected to the PLC can be exposed to Ignition
as sensors and controls. For the rest of the devices the
preferred protocol is MODBUS which is also supported by
the Ignition server. For those devices that do not support
MODBUS (e.g. RGA units), two interfacing methods are
envisaged: 1) custom Java drivers written in the Ignition
software development kit, and 2) Python MODBUS server
with plugin system or custom Python drivers.
The operator interface is comprised of a set of panels, organized into a tree view. At a lower GUI level, the
panels represent the experiment subsystem via functional
diagrams with relevant information on the state of sensors
and controls displayed in real time. The authorized system
experts can also use these GUI panels to alter the controls

LN Distribution
Thermosiphons

SURF surface
(direct ﬁber link)

Local
Direct
Local HMI
Dev. (Ignition Client) control

Remote HMI
(Ignition client)

Gids HV
Local
switch

Xe gas system
Local Network

Storage

Master
PLC

Circulation
Compressor 1

PLC

Compressor 2

PLC

Ignition Server
HW Interface
Tag manager
DB interface
Conﬁg. DB

Recovery
Compressor 1

PLC

Compressor 2

PLC

Alarm system
Automation
Historian

ICE module

SURF
gateway VPN
DAQ & Electronics
Detector
Calibration
Environment
PMT HV
Run Control

Online DB
Ofﬂine DB

UPS/Generator Powered
Figure 18: Slow control functional diagram.

not protected by the PLC interlocks. At a higher level,
several panels show the real-time status of the system and
subsystems from which a trained operator is able to tell
the overall health of the system. These panels also allow
to assess high level information, for example alarm status, current operation mode, status of automation scripts,
etc. At a very high level, a single summary plot of the
entire system can be prepared by slow control and sent to
run control for display in a single status panel on the run
control GUI.
7. Detector Assembly
LZ is being installed inside the existing 25’ diameter,
20’ tall Davis Cavern water tank used for the LUX experiment. Access to the water tank is down the 4850’
vertical Yates shaft and through horizontal drifts. Some
large items of equipment are segmented and transported
underground in sections, including the OCV (three sections), and the tall AVs (four sections). Other items, like
the ICV and its TPC payload, and the LXe tower, are
transported and installed after being fully assembled on
the surface.
Substantial changes to the infrastructure of the Davis
Campus were required to accommodate the detector size
increase from LUX to LZ. This included creating more
floor space with a platform for cable breakouts, conversion
of the compressor room roof to a space for purification and
Xe sampling equipment, and converting two previously unused excavations to spaces for Xe storage and Rn removal
equipment.
Underground assembly started in 2018 with the transport of the 12-foot tall AVs. Each AV was contained in
a heavy steel frame. At the top of the Yates shaft the

Figure 19: Intermediate assembly. A section through the Davis Campus showing the OCV ready to receive the ICV, and the ICV suspended above with cable conduits. 1-Deck; 2-Water tank.

frame was mounted in a rotatable assembly, slung under
the cage, and lowered to the 4850’ level. The rotatable
assembly was used to move each 5000 pound unit around
duct work and other obstacles between the cage and the
Davis Cavern upper deck. Each AV was wrapped in two
plastic bags to keep dust from contaminating the acrylic
and the water tank. The AVs are sensitive to large temperature changes so timing and speed were also important
considerations during transport.
20

After the four tall AVs were placed inside the water
tank, the three sections of the OCV were transported underground and installed on support legs inside. After a
leak cheak, and a final washing of the water tank and its
equipment, the OCV top was removed and stored to prepare for ICV installation, and cleanroom protocols were
instituted for entering and exiting the area. An underground radon reduction system treats the air supplied to
the water tank during the remainder of the assembly.
Much of the TPC assembly work was done in the Surface Assembly Lab (SAL) at SURF because of its superior
logistics compared to the underground. A well sealed class
1000 clean room with reduced radon air supply [34] and
a clean monorail crane was used for cryostat acceptance,
TPC assembly, and insertion of the TPC into the ICV.
The Reduced Radon System (RRS) has been measured
to produce air laden with radon at a specific activity of
4 mBq/m3 given input air at about 8.5 Bq/m3 . The PMT
and instrumentation cables are routed through three reinforced bellows attached to the ICV, and the entire assembly is transported underground together. During transport the bellows are sealed and the ICV is purged with
boil off LN. This begins the process of removing H2 O, O2 ,
and Kr from the large mass of PTFE in the detector. All
subsequent assembly steps are designed to keep the TPC
under nitrogen purge until it can be evacuated and filled
with Xe gas.
The TPC is assembled and installed into the ICV vertically. To move underground, the assembly is rotated to
horizontal, set in a transport frame, and moved to the
Yates headframe. Slings attached to the underside of the
cage are used to lift the assembly into a vertical position
underneath the cage. This process is reversed at the 4850’
level, returning it to horizontal, for transport down the
drift. It is set vertical again on a shielding platform over
the water tank. A temporary clean room is constructed
around the ICV, and the last protective bag is removed.
The ICV is connected to the OCV top by three tie bars
(instrumented threaded rods) that allow for precision leveling of the TPC relative to the liquid Xe surface while
minimizing thermal losses. During final lowering into the
OCV the ICV is supported by the tie bars. Once sealed,
the ICV is evacuated, and the AVs and OD PMTs are assembled around the OCV in the water tank. A rendering
of the ICV just prior to nesting within the OCV is shown
in Fig. 19.
A second radon reduction system is available in the
Davis Cavern to supply air depleted of radon. It has
demonstrated an output of 100 mBq/m3 given input air
of 70 Bq/m3 .
The water and GdLS are co-filled to minimize stress in
the AV walls. The GdLS will be transported underground
in 150 sealed barrels. Each is placed on a scale in a clean
tent before connection to the liquid transfer system. The
liquid is pumped into the GdLS reservoir and distributed
to the AVs. Once the liquids are filled detector commissioning can begin.

8. Materials Screening & Backgrounds
Material screening is the primary route to controlling
the ER and NR backgrounds resulting from radioactivity in the experiment. Measurements of radioactive nuclides in and on all detector components are required. The
ubiquitous and naturally occurring radioactive materials
(NORM) of particular concern are the γ-ray emitting nuclides 40 K; 137 Cs; and 60 Co, as well as 238 U, 235 U, 232 Th,
and their progeny. The U and Th chains are also responsible for neutron production following spontaneous fission
and (α,n) reactions. Kr and Rn outgassing from materials
into the Xe also results in ER backgrounds, and α-emitting
Rn daughters can contribute to neutron backgrounds when
deposited on certain materials.
Fixed contamination, referring to non-mobile NORM
nuclides embedded within materials, is the dominant source
of neutron and γ-ray emission in LZ. To ensure a subdominant contribution from fixed contaminants, relative
to irreducible backgrounds, all materials considered for
use in the construction of the experiment are screened for
NORM nuclides to ≈0.2 mBq/kg sensitivities, equivalent
to tens of parts per trillion (ppt) g/g for 238 U and 232 Th.
This ensures a maximum contribution from fixed contamination of less than 0.4 NR and 1 × 10−6 events/(kev ·
kg · year) ER in the LZ exposure. For materials such as
PTFE, which are produced in granular form before being
sintered in molds, plate-out constitutes additional risk because surface contamination of the granular form becomes
contamination in bulk when the granules are poured into
molds. A limit of 10 mBq/kg of 210 Po and 210 Pb in PTFE
maintains an NR contribution of <0.1 count in the LZ
exposure.
Radon emanated from within detector components is
the dominant contributor to background in LZ, primarily through the “naked” beta emission from 214 Pb in the
222
Rn sub-chain as it decays to 214 Bi. The 214 Bi beta
decay itself is readily identified by the subsequent 214 Po
alpha decay that would be observed within an LZ event
timeline (T1/2 =160 µs). Similar coincidence rejection also
occurs where beta decay is accompanied by a high-energy
γ-ray, which may still be tagged by the Xe Skin or OD vetoes even if it leaves the active Xe volume. 220 Rn generates
212
Pb, resulting in 212 Bi-212 Po sequential events which can
be tagged. Radon daughters are readily identified through
their alpha decay signatures and can be used to characterize the 222 Rn and 220 Rn decay chain rates and distributions in the active region, providing a useful complement to
estimating radon concentration from the beta decay contribution to the ER background.
The specific activity of 222 Rn in LZ is required to be
less than 2 µBq/kg of LXe, equivalent to 20 mBq. All
xenon-wetted components in LZ have been constructed
from low-radon materials selected through dedicated measurement facilities. Due to the large number of expected
emitters, these facilities were required to achieve sensitivity of 0.2 mBq to 222 Rn. Measurements are made at
21

room temperature, however, the expected emanation can
depend strongly on temperature depending on the source
material. A conservative approach is adopted in estimating radon emanation in our model, taking credit for a reduction at LXe temperatures wherever this is supported
in the literature. Significant background from 220 Rn is not
expected given its very short half-life; we conservatively include in our background model a contribution from 220 Rn
of 20% of the ER counts from 222 Rn.
The accumulation of 222 Rn-daughters plated-out during the manufacture and assembly of components as well
as dust and particulates contribute to the LZ background.
The α-particle emitting Rn-daughters can induce neutrons
via (α,n) processes, particularly problematic for materials
with large cross-sections for this process such as flourine,
present in the TPC walls (PTFE). Plate-out on the inside
of the TPC walls causes α-particles and recoiling ions to
enter the active volume. The risk of mis-reconstructing
these recoils into the fiducial volume in particular sets
stringent constraints on plate-out on the PTFE. LZ instituted a target for plate-out of 210 Pb and 210 Po of less
than 0.5 mBq/m2 on the TPC walls and below 10 mBq/m2
everywhere else.
Generic dust containing NORM also releases γ-rays
and induce neutron emission. Dust is further expected
to be the single largest contributor to radon emanation.
Dust contamination is limited to less than 500 ng/cm2 on
all wetted surfaces in the detector and xenon circulation
system. Under the conservative assumption that 25% of
222
Rn is released from the dust, via either emanation or
recoils out of small grain-size particulates, this limits the
222
Rn activity from dust to less than 10 mBq.
8.1. HPGe + MS Techniques and Instruments
The LZ screening campaign deploys several mature techniques for the identification and characterization of radioactive species within these bulk detector materials, primarily γ-ray spectroscopy with High Purity Germanium
(HPGe) detectors and Inductively-Coupled Plasma Mass
Spectrometry (ICP-MS), supported by Neutron Activation
Analysis (NAA). These complementary techniques collectively produce a complete picture of the fixed radiological
contaminants.
Sensitivity to U and Th decay chain species down to
≈10 ppt has been demonstrated using ultralow-background
HPGe detectors. HPGe can also assay 60 Co, 40 K, and
other radioactive species emitting γ-rays. This technique
is nondestructive and, in addition to screening of candidate materials, finished components can be assayed prior
to installation. Under the assumption of secular equilibrium, the U and Th content, assuming natural terrestrial abundance ratios, may be inferred from the measurement of isotopic decay emissions lower in their respective chains. However, secular equilibrium can be broken
through removal of reactive nuclides during chemical processing or through emanation. HPGe readily identifies the
concentrations of nuclides from mid- to late-chain 238 U
22

and 232 Th, particularly those with energies in excess of
several hundred keV. Background-subtracted γ-ray counting is performed around specific energy ranges to identify
radioactive nuclides. Taking into account the detector efficiency at that energy for the specific sample geometry
allows calculation of isotopic concentrations. A typical assay lasts 1–2 weeks per sample to accrue statistics at the
sensitivities required for the LZ assays. These direct γ-ray
assays probe radioactivity from the bulk of materials and
may identify equilibrium states.
Sixteen HPGe detectors located in facilities both aboveand underground have been used for LZ, with differences in
detector types and shielding configuration providing useful dynamic range both in terms of sensitivity to particular nuclides and to varying sample geometries. The detectors are typically several hundreds of grams to several
kilograms in mass, with a mixture of n-type, p-type, and
broad energy Ge (BEGe) crystals, providing relative efficiency at the tens of percent through to in excess of 100%
(as compared to the detection efficiency of a (3 × 3)-inch
NaI crystal for 1.33 MeV γ-rays from a 60 Co source placed
25 cm from the detector face). While p-type crystals can
be grown to larger sizes and hence require less counting
time due to their high efficiency, the low energy performance of the n-type and broad energy crystals is superior
due to less intervening material between source and active Ge. Clean samples are placed close to the Ge crystal
and assayed for several days to weeks in order to accrue
sufficient statistics, depending on the minimum detectable
activity (MDA). The detectors are generally shielded with
low-activity Pb and Cu, flushed with dry nitrogen to displace the Rn-carrying air, and sometimes are surrounded
by veto detectors to suppress background from Compton
scattering that dominates the MDA for low-energy γ-rays.
To reduce backgrounds further, most of the detectors are
operated in underground sites [35, 36], lowering the muon
flux by several orders of magnitude. We also utilize a number of surface counters, some of them employing active
cosmic rate veto systems, that are particularly useful for
pre-screenings before more sensitive underground assays.
To ensure uniform analysis outputs for all HPGe detectors, a cross-calibration program was performed using all
detectors active in 2014. This involved the blind assay of
a Marinelli beaker containing ≈ 2 kg of Rhyolite sourced
from the Davis Cavern at SURF. This sample had previously been characterized using the MAEVE p-type HPGe
detector at LBNL. Across the eight detectors online at
the time, assays for both 238 U and 232 Th were within 1σ
of each-other. As additional detectors have been brought
online, consistency has been assured by cross-calibration
intra-facility.
ICP-MS offers precise determination of elemental contamination with potentially up to 100× better sensitivity
for the progenitor U and Th concentrations compared to γray spectroscopy. Since ICP-MS directly assays the 238 U,
235
U, and 232 Th progenitor activity it informs the contribution to neutron flux from (α,n) in low-Z materials, but

Table 5: Primary material radio-assay techniques, indicating isotopic sensitivity and detection limits, as well as typical throughput or singlesample measurement duration.
Technique

Isotopic
Sensitivity
238

Typical
Sensitivity

Sampling
Duration

Destructive/Nondestructive and
Notes

Locations (and
Number of
Systems if > 1)

Samples
Assayed

kg

Up to 2
weeks

Non-destructive,
very versatile, not as
sensitive as other
techniques, large
samples

SURF ×6,
LBNL ×1,
U. Alabama ×2,
Boulby ×7

926

mg to g

Days

Destructive, requires
sample digestion,
preparation critical

UCL, IBS, BHUC,
U. Alabama

157

g

Days to
weeks

Destructive, useful
for non-metals,
minimal sample
preparation

Irradiated at
MITR-II, HPGe
assay at
U. Alabama

3

mg to g

Days

Destructive, minimal
matrix effects,
cannot analyze
ceramics and other
insulators

National Research
Council Canada

2

kg

1 to 3
weeks

Non-destructive,
large samples,
limited by size of
emanation chamber

UCL ×2,
U. Maryland,
SDSM&T ×2,
U. Alabama ×2

175

g to kg

<1 week

Non-destructive, thin
samples, large
surface area required

SDSM&T (Si),
Brown (XIA),
Boulby (XIA),
U. Alabama (Si)

306

Sample
Mass

235

U,

U,
Th
40
chains, K,
60
137
Co,
Cs
any γ-ray
emitter
232

HPGe

238

ICP-MS

235

U,
U,
Th (top
of chain), K
232

238

GD-MS

222

210

Surface α

210

Bi,

−12

10

g/g

−12

10
g/g to
−14
10
g/g

235

U,
U,
Th (top
of chain)

232

Radon
Emanation

5 × 10
g/g U,
−10
10
g/g Th

235

U,
U,
Th (top
of chain)

232

238

NAA

−11

−10

10

g/g

Rn

0.1 mBq

Pb,

120 α/(m ·
day)

210

2

Po

also the contribution from spontaneous fission, which in
specific materials can dominate. However, it cannot identify daughter nuclides in the U and Th decay chains that
are better probed by HPGe. The ICP-MS technique assays very small samples that are atomized and measured
with a mass spectrometer. As a destructive technique,
it is not used on finished components. The limitation of
ICP-MS is that the sample must be acid soluble and that
several samples from materials must be screened to probe
contamination distribution and homogeneity. Assays take
1–2 days per material, dominated by the sample preparation time, where extreme care must be taken to avoid
contamination of solvents and reactants.
ICP-MS assays for LZ materials have been performed
using several facilities, the majority of which operate Agilent 7900 ICP-MS systems within minimum ISO Class 6
cleanrooms [37]. These are capable of achieving sensitivity to U and Th in materials at the level of several ppt.
Protocols and methodologies for sample preparation are
largely based on well established procedures [38–40].
These measurements take significant time owing to the
need for high statistics, standard addition calibration of
high-concentration samples, and frequent machine cleaning. For more routine measurements, the backgrounds are

simply monitored and reported as an equivalent concentration, and lower concentration samples allow for external
calibrations and a significantly relaxed cleaning schedule,
allowing to measure less demanding samples at the rate
of several per day with sensitivities to U and Th on the
order of a few hundred ppt. Finally, some initial work has
been done to develop measurements of potassium using
the cold plasma configuration, leading to measurements of
a few hundred ppb of K.
NAA has been used by LZ to assay PTFE to sub-ppt
g/g levels of 238 U and 232 Th that is not well suited to
HPGe, due to the sensitivity, nor ICP-MS, due to difficulty in digesting PTFE. However, as with ICP-MS, this
technique requires small sample masses, does not assay finished components, and assumptions of secular equilibrium
need to be made since this technique measures the top
of the U and Th chains. Samples are irradiated with neutrons from a reactor to activate some of the stable nuclides,
which subsequently emit γ-rays of well-known energy and
half-life that are detected through γ-ray spectroscopy. Elemental concentrations are then inferred, using tabulated
neutron-capture cross sections convolved with the reactor neutron spectra. Depending on the surface treatment,
NAA can probe both bulk and surface contamination. Its
23

application and sensitivity are limited by the composition
of the material.

8.4. Cleaning procedures and protocols (ASTM standards)
A rigorous program of cleanliness management is implemented to ensure that the accumulated surface and dust
contamination are monitored, tracked and do not exceed
requirements. All detector components that contact xenon
must be cleaned and assembled according to validated
cleanliness protocols to achieve the dust deposition levels
below 500 ng/cm2 and plate-out levels below 0.5 mBq/m2
for the TPC inner-walls, and 10 mBq/m2 everywhere else.
Witness plates accompany the production and assembly
of all detector components to ensure QC and demonstrate
QA through the plate-out and dust assays. The titanium
cryostat was cleaned by AstroPak [16] to ASTM standard
IEST-STD-CC1246 (rev E) level 50R1 (ICV) and level
VC-0.5-1000-500UV (OCV). The ICV cleaning standard
is equivalent to the requirement that mass density of dust
be less than 100 ng/cm2 . The vessels were etched according to ASTM B-600.
As described in Sec. 7, detector integration is done in a
reduced-radon cleanroom at the SAL at SURF. Dust and
plate-out monitoring on-site was continuously performed
to measure and maintain compliance with tolerable dust
and plate-out levels.

8.2. Radon Emanation Techniques and Instruments
Radon emanation measurements of all xenon-wetted
components within the inner cryostat and those in the
gas system that come into contact with Xe during experimental operation have been performed using four facilities
available to LZ, listed in Table 5. In all of the facilities
radon is accumulated in emanation chambers, where samples typically remain for two weeks or more. In many cases
multiple measurements are performed per sample. The
radon is then transferred using a carrier gas to a detector
to be counted.
In one of the stations, the radon atoms are collected
and counted by passing the radon-bearing gas through liquid, dissolving most of the radon. The scintillator is then
used to count Bi-Po coincidences, detected through gated
coincidence logic, using one PMT viewing the scintillator.
In the other three stations, radon atoms and daughters are
collected electrostatically onto silicon PIN diode detectors
to detect 218 Po and 214 Po alpha decays. The radon screening systems have been developed such that anything from
individual components through to sections of LZ pipework
may be assayed.
All stations were initially evaluated using calibrated
sources of radon, with a cross-calibration program performed to ensure the accuracy of each system’s overall efficiency and ability to estimate and subtract backgrounds.
The radon-emanation screening campaign extends beyond the material selection and construction phase and
into detector integration and commissioning phases. A
system is available underground at SURF in order to screen
large-scale assembled detector elements and plumbing lines.
As pieces or sections are completed during installation of
gas pipework for the LZ experiment, they are isolated and
assessed for Rn emanation and outgassing for early identification of problematic seals or components that require
replacement, cleaning, or correction.

8.5. Backgrounds summary
Measured material radioactivity and anticipated levels
of dispersed and surface radioactivity are combined with
the Monte Carlo simulations and analysis cuts to determine background rates in the detector. Table 8.3 presents
integrated background ER and NR counts in the 5.6 tonne
fiducial mass for a 1000 live day run using a reference cutand-count analysis, both before and after ER discrimination cuts are applied. For the purposes of tracking material radioactivity throughout the design and construction
of LZ, Table 8.3 is based on a restricted region of interest
relevant to a 40 GeV/c2 WIMP spectrum, equivalent to
approximately 1.5–6.5 keV for ERs and 6–30 keV for NRs.
The expected total from all ER(NR) background sources
is 1195(1.24) counts in the full 1000 live day exposure.
Applying discrimination against ER at 99.5% for an NR
acceptance of 50% (met for all WIMP masses given the
nominal drift field and light collection efficiency in LZ [4])
suppresses the ER(NR) background to 5.97(0.62) counts.
Radon presents the largest contribution to the total number of events. Atmospheric neutrinos are the largest contributor to NR counts, showing that LZ is approaching
the irreducible background from coherent neutrino scattering [41].

8.3. Surface Assays (XIA, Si, dust microscopy)
Two sensitive detectors have been used to carry out
assays of Rn plate-out to ensure the requirements are met
and inform the experiment background model. The first
is the commercial XIA Ultralo-1800 surface alpha detector system, suitable for routine screening of small samples including witness plates and coupons deployed during component assembly and transport to track exposure.
The second detector employs a panel of large-area Si detectors installed in a large vacuum chamber. These systems exceed the requisite sensitivity to 210 Po at the level
of 0.5 mBq/m2 . Dust assays are performed using highpowered microscopy and x-ray fluorescence techniques.

9. Offline Computing
The LZ data is stored, processed and distributed using
two data centers, one in the U.S. and one in the U.K. Both
data centers are capable of storing, processing, simulating
and analyzing the LZ data in near real-time. Resource
optimization, redundancy, and ease of data access for all
24

Table 6: The estimated backgrounds from all significant sources in the LZ 1000 day WIMP search exposure. Mass-weighted average activities
8
are shown for composite materials. Solar B and hep neutrinos are only expected to contribute at very low energies (i.e. WIMP masses)
and are excluded from the table.
ER
NR
Background Source
(cts)
(cts)
Detector Components
Surface Contamination
2

Dust (intrinsic activity, 500 ng/cm )
2

Plate-out (PTFE panels, 50 nBq/cm )
210

Bi mobility (0.1 µBq/kg)

9

0.07

40

0.39

0.2

0.05

-

0.05

40.0

-

Ion misreconstruction (50 nBq/cm )

2

-

0.16

210

Pb (in bulk PTFE, 10 mBq/kg)

-

0.12

Laboratory and Cosmogenics

5

0.06

Laboratory Rock Walls

4.6

0.00

Muon Induced Neutrons

-

0.06

Cosmogenic Activation

0.2

-

Xenon Contaminants

819

0

222

Rn (1.81 µBq/kg)

681

-

220

Rn (0.09 µBq/kg)

111

-

nat

Kr (0.015 ppt)

24.5

-

nat

Ar (0.45 ppb)

2.5

-

Physics

322

0.51

136

67

-

Xe 2νββ
7

13

Solar Neutrinos: pp+ Be+ N

255

-

Diffuse Supernova Neutrinos

-

0.05

Atmospheric Neutrinos

-

0.46

Total

1,195

1.03

Total (with 99.5 % ER discrimination, 50 % NR efficiency)

5.97

0.51

Sum of ER and NR in LZ for 1000 days, 5.6 tonne FV, with all analysis cuts

25

6.49

LZ collaborators are the guiding principles of this dual
data-center design.
LZ raw data are initially written to the surface staging computer at SURF, which was designed with sufficient
capacity to store approximately two months of LZ data,
running in WIMP-search mode. This guarantees continuity of operations in case of a major network outage.
The surface staging computer at SURF transfers the raw
data files to the U.S. data center, where initial processing is performed. The reconstructed data files are made
available to all groups in the collaboration and represent
the primary input for the physics analyses. The U.S. data
center is hosted at the National Energy Research Scientific
Computing (NERSC) center [42]. Data simulation and reconstruction at NERSC is performed using a number of
Cray supercomputers [43].
The raw and reconstructed files are mirrored to the
U.K. data center (hosted at Imperial College London) both
as a backup, and to share the load of file access and processing. Subsequent reprocessing of the data (following
new calibrations, updated reconstruction and identification algorithms, etc.) is expected to take place at one or
both locations, with the newly generated files mirrored at
both sites and made available to the collaboration. Simulation and data processing at the U.K. data center are
performed using distributed GridPP resources [44, 45].

applies the calibrations, looks for S1 and S2 candidate
events, performs the event reconstruction, and produces
the so-called reduced quantity (RQ) files, which represent
the primary input for the physics analyses.
LZap is based on the Hive version of the Gaudi code,
which is specially designed to provide multi-threading at
the sub-event level. The framework supports the development of different physics modules from LZ collaborators
and automatically takes care of the basic data handling
(I/O, event/run selection, DB interfaces, etc.). Gaudi features a well established mechanism for extending its input
and output modules to handle custom formats. This functionality has has been exploited in the design of the LZ
raw data and RQ formats.
All non-DAQ data, i.e. any data that is not read out by
the DAQ with each event, is stored in a database known
as the “conditions database”. This database can automatically understand the interval of validity for each piece
of data (based on timestamps), and supports data versioning for instances such as when better calibrations become available. This design implements a hierarchy of data
sources, which means that during development of code or
calibrations it is possible to specify alternate sources, allowing for the validation of updated entries.
All LZ software is centrally maintained through a software repository based on GitLab [51]. GitLab provides a
continuous integration tool, allowing for automatic testing
and installation of the offline codebase on the U.S. and
U.K. data center servers. Build automation is inherited
from the Gaudi infrastructure and supported via CMake.
Release Management and Version Control standards were
strictly enforced from a very early stage of the experiment
to ensure sharing, verifiability and reproducibility of the
results. Each code release undergoes a battery of tests before being deployed to production. Release management
ensures that all the changes are properly communicated
and documented, to achieve full reproducibility.
Software distribution is achieved via CernVM File System (CVMFS) [52]. CVMFS is a CERN-developed network file system based on HTTP and optimized to deliver experiment software in a fast, scalable, and reliable
way. Files and file metadata are cached and downloaded on
demand. CVMFS features robust error handling and secure access over untrusted networks [53]. The LZ CVMFS
server is visible to all the machines in the U.S. and U.K.
data centers. All the LZ software releases and external
packages are delivered via CVMFS: this ensures a unified
data production and analysis stream, because every user
can access identical builds of the same executables, removing possible dependencies on platform and configuration.
A rigorous program of Mock Data Challenges has been
enacted, in order to validate the entire software stack and
to prepare the collaboration for science analysis. The first
data challenge simulated the initial LZ commissioning and
tested the functionality of the reconstruction framework.
The second data challenge covered the first science run of
LZ and tested the entire data analysis chain, including cal-

9.1. The Offline Software Stack
The LZ Offline software stack is based on standard
HEP frameworks, specifically Geant4 for simulations [46]
and Gaudi for reconstruction [47].
The simulation package is called BACCARAT [48]. This
software provides object-oriented coding capability specifically tuned for noble liquid detectors, working on top of
the Geant4 engine. BACCARAT can produce detailed, accurate simulations of the LZ detector response and backgrounds, which are crucial both for detector design and
during data analysis. The physics accuracy of the LZ simulations package was validated during the science run of
LUX, as described in [49].
BACCARAT is integrated into the broader LZ analysis framework, from production to validation and analysis.
Two output formats are supported, a raw simulation output at the interaction level, and a reduced tree format at
the event level. Both output files are written in the ROOT
data format [50]. A Detector Electronics Response package can be used to emulate the signal processing done by
the front-end electronics of LZ. It reads raw photon hits
from BACCARAT to create mock digitized waveforms, organized and written in an identical format to the output of
the LZ data acquisition system. These can be read in by
the analysis software, providing practice data for framework development and analysis.
The data processing and reconstruction software (LZ
analysis package, or LZap for short) extracts the PMT
charge and time information from the digitized signals,
26

ibrations, detailed backgrounds and potential signals. The
third and final data challenge is currently underway (2019)
and will test the complete analysis strategy, validating the
readiness of the offline system just before the underground
installation of LZ.

References

10. Conclusion
Considerable progress has been made towards implementing the LZ conceptual and technical designs described
in Refs. [4, 5]. The start of science operations is expected 2020. The projected background rate enables a
1000 day exposure of the 5.6 tonne fiducial mass, with a
spin-independent cross-section sensitivity of 1.5×10−48 cm2
(90% C.L.) at 40 GeV/c2 . This will probe a significant portion of the viable WIMP dark matter parameter space. LZ
is also be sensitive to spin-dependent interactions, through
the odd neutron number isotopes 129 Xe and 131 Xe (26.4%
and 21.2% respectively by mass). For spin-dependent WIMPneutron(-proton) scattering a sensitivity of 2.7×10−43 cm2
(8.1×10−42 cm2 ) is expected at 40 GeV/c2 .
11. Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science under contract
number DE-AC02-05CH11231 and under grant number
de-sc0019066; by the U.S. National Science Foundation
(NSF); by the U.K. Science & Technology Facilities Council under award numbers, ST/M003655/1, ST/M003981/1,
ST/M003744/1, ST/M003639/1, ST/M003604/1, and
ST/M003469/1; and by the Portuguese Foundation for
Science and Technology (FCT)under award number
PTDC/FIS-PAR/28567/2017; and by the Institute for Basic Science, Korea (budget number IBS-R016-D1). University College London and Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory thank the U.K. Royal Society for travel funds
under the International Exchange Scheme (IE141517). We
acknowledge additional support from the Boulby Underground Laboratory in the U.K.; the University of Wisconsin for grant UW PRJ82AJ; and the GridPP Collaboration, in particular at Imperial College London. This
work was partially enabled by the University College London Cosmoparticle Initiative. Futhermore, this research
used resources of the National Energy Research Scientific
Computing Center, a DOE Office of Science User Facility
supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department
of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. The
University of Edinburgh is a charitable body, registered in
Scotland, with the registration number SC005336. The research supporting this work took place in whole or in part
at the Sanford Underground Research Facility (SURF) in
Lead, South Dakota. The assistance of SURF and its personnel in providing physical access and general logistical
and technical support is acknowledged. SURF is a federally sponsored research facility under Award Number desc0020216.
27

[1] D. S. Akerib, et al., The Large Underground Xenon (LUX) Experiment, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A704 (2013) 111–126. arXiv:
1211.3788, doi:10.1016/j.nima.2012.11.135.
[2] D. S. Akerib, et al., Results from a search for dark matter in the
complete LUX exposure, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118 (2) (2017) 021303.
arXiv:1608.07648, doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.118.021303.
[3] D. Yu. Akimov, et al., WIMP-nucleon cross-section results from
the second science run of ZEPLIN-III, Phys. Lett. B709 (2012)
14–20. arXiv:1110.4769, doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2012.01.
064.
[4] B. J. Mount, et al., LUX-ZEPLIN (LZ) Technical Design ReportarXiv:1703.09144.
[5] D. S. Akerib, et al., LUX-ZEPLIN (LZ) Conceptual Design Report, Conceptual Design Report; LBNL-190005, FERMILABTM-2621-AE-E-PPD. arXiv:1509.02910.
[6] D. S. Akerib, et al., Projected WIMP Sensitivity of the LUXZEPLIN (LZ) Dark Matter ExperimentarXiv:1802.06039.
[7] D. S. Akerib, et al., Identification of Radiopure Titanium for the
LZ Dark Matter Experiment and Future Rare Event Searches,
Astropart. Phys. 96 (2017) 1–10. arXiv:1702.02646, doi:10.
1016/j.astropartphys.2017.09.002.
[8] D. Y. Akimov, A. I. Bolozdynya, Y. V. Efremenko, V. A. Kaplin,
A. V. Khromov, Y. A. Melikyan, V. V. Sosnovtsev, Observation
of light emission from Hamamatsu R11410-20 photomultiplier
tubes, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A794 (2015) 1–2. arXiv:1504.
07651, doi:10.1016/j.nima.2015.04.066.
[9] B. López Paredes, H. M. Araújo, F. Froborg, N. Marangou,
I. Olcina, T. J. Sumner, R. Taylor, A. Tomás, A. Vacheret,
Response of photomultiplier tubes to xenon scintillation light,
Astropart. Phys. 102 (2018) 55–66. arXiv:1801.01597, doi:
10.1016/j.astropartphys.2018.04.006.
[10] F. Neves, A. Lindote, A. Morozov, V. Solovov, C. Silva, P. Bras,
J. P. Rodrigues, M. I. Lopes, Measurement of the absolute reflectance of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) immersed in liquid xenon, JINST 12 (01) (2017) P01017. arXiv:1612.07965,
doi:10.1088/1748-0221/12/01/P01017.
[11] J. Haefner, et al., Reflectance dependence of polytetrafluoroethylene on thickness for xenon scintillation light, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A856 (2017) 86–91. arXiv:1608.01717, doi:
10.1016/j.nima.2017.01.057.
[12] C. Lee, Mitigation of Backgrounds for the Large Underground
Xenon Dark Matter Experiment, Ph.D. thesis, Case Western
Reserve University (2015).
[13] E. Bernard, C. H. Faham, T. M. Ito, B. Lundberg, M. Messina,
F. Monrabal, S. P. Pereverzev, F. Resnati, P. C. Rowson,
M. Soderberg, T. Strauss, A. Tomas, J. Va’vra, H. Wang, in:
B. Rebel, C. Hall (Eds.), High Voltage in Noble Liquids for
High Energy Physics, Vol. 9 of J. Instrum., 2014, p. T08004,
pp. 23-26. arXiv:1403.3613.
[14] A. Tomás, H. M. Araújo, A. J. Bailey, A. Bayer, E. Chen,
B. López Paredes, T. J. Sumner, Study and mitigation of spurious electron emission from cathodic wires in noble liquid time
projection chambers, Astropart. Phys. 103 (2018) 49–61. arXiv:
1801.07231, doi:10.1016/j.astropartphys.2018.07.001.
[15] California Fine Wire, Grover Beach, California, USA, http:
//www.calfinewire.com//.
[16] Astropak Corp., Costa Mesa, California, https://astropak.
com//.
[17] SAES Pure Gas Inc., San Luis Obispo, California, USA, http:
//www.saespuregas.com/.com//.
[18] Fluitron Inc., Ivyland, Pennsylvania, USA, http://fluitron.
com//.
[19] K. Pushkin, et al., Study of radon reduction in gases for rare
event search experiments, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A903 (2018)
267–276. arXiv:1805.11306, doi:10.1016/j.nima.2018.06.
076.
[20] K. Abe, et al., Radon removal from gaseous xenon with activated charcoal, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 661 (1) (2012) 50 – 57.
doi:10.1016/j.nima.2011.09.051.

URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0168900211018468
[21] D. S. Leonard, A. Dobi, C. Hall, L. Kaufman, T. Langford,
S. Slutsky, Y.-R. Yen, A simple high-sensitivity technique for
purity analysis of xenon gas, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A621 (2010)
678–684. arXiv:1002.2742, doi:10.1016/j.nima.2010.04.152.
[22] A. Dobi, C. G. Davis, C. Hall, T. Langford, S. Slutsky, Y.-R.
Yen, Detection of krypton in xenon for dark matter applications,
Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A665 (2011) 1–6. arXiv:1103.2714, doi:
10.1016/j.nima.2011.11.043.
[23] S. Haselschwardt, S. Shaw, H. Nelson, M. Witherell, M. Yeh,
K. Lesko, A. Cole, S. Kyre, D. White, A liquid scintillation
detector for radioassay of gadolinium-loaded liquid scintillator
for the lz outer detectorarXiv:1808.05595.
[24] D. S. Akerib, et al., Measurement of the Gamma Ray Background in the Davis Cavern at the Sanford Underground Research FacilityarXiv:1904.02112.
[25] A. Dobi, Measurement of the Electron Recoil Band of the
LUX Dark Matter Detector With a Tritium Calibration Source,
Ph.D. thesis, University of Maryland, College Park (2014).
[26] D. S. Akerib, et al., Tritium calibration of the LUX dark matter
experiment, Phys. Rev. D93 (7) (2016) 072009. arXiv:1512.
03133, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.93.072009.
83m
[27] D. S. Akerib, et al.,
Kr calibration of the 2013 LUX dark
matter search, Phys. Rev. D96 (11) (2017) 112009. arXiv:1708.
02566, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.96.112009.
[28] D. S. Akerib, et al., Low-energy (0.7-74 keV) nuclear recoil calibration of the LUX dark matter experiment using D-D neutron
scattering kinematicsarXiv:1608.05381.
[29] W.-I.-N.-R. P. Electronics, http://www.wiener-d.com/.
[30] Skutek instrumentation, http://skutek.com/.
[31] E. Druszkiewicz, The Data Acquisition System for LZ, JINST
11 (02) (2016) C02072.
arXiv:1511.08385, doi:10.1088/
1748-0221/11/02/C02072.
[32] Inductive Automation, 340 Palladio Parkway, Suite 540 (4th
Floor) Folsom, CA 95630-8833, USA, Ignition SQL Bridge
(2015).
[33] Siemens Simatic PCS 7 CPU 410-5H Contoller (2016).
URL
http://www.industry.siemens.com/topics/global/
en/magazines/process-news/process-automation/pages/
simatic-pcs7-cpu410-5h.aspx
[34] ATEKO a.s., Hradec Králové, Czech Republic, http://www.
ateko.cz.
[35] P. Scovell, E. Meehan, H. Araújo, J. Dobson, C. Ghag,
H. Kraus, V. Kudryavtsev, X.-R. Liu, P. Majewski, S. Paling,
R. Preece, R. Saakyan, A. Tomás, C. Toth, L. Yeoman, Lowbackground gamma spectroscopy at the boulby underground
laboratory, Astroparticle Physics 97 (2018) 160 – 173. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.astropartphys.2017.11.006.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0927650517302517
[36] B. J. Mount, et al., Black Hills State University Underground
Campus, Appl. Radiat. Isot. 126 (2017) 130–133. doi:10.1016/
j.apradiso.2017.02.025.
[37] J. Dobson, C. Ghag, L. Manenti, Ultra-low background
mass spectrometry for rare-event searches, Nucl. Instrum.
Meth. AarXiv:1708.08860, doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
nima.2017.10.014.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0168900217310513
[38] D. S. Leonard, et al., Systematic study of trace radioactive
impurities in candidate construction materials for EXO-200,
Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A591 (2008) 490–509. arXiv:0709.4524,
doi:10.1016/j.nima.2008.03.001.
[39] B. D. LaFerriere, T. C. Maiti, I. J. Arnquist, E. W. Hoppe,
A novel assay method for the trace determination of Th and
U in copper and lead using inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometry, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A775 (2015) 93–98. doi:
10.1016/j.nima.2014.11.052.
[40] P. Grinberg, S. Willie, R. Sturgeon, Determination of thorium
and uranium in ultrapure lead by inductively coupled plasma

mass spectrometry, Anal. Chem. 77 (2005) 2432–2436. doi:
10.1021/ac048539t.
[41] J. Billard, L. Strigari, E. Figueroa-Feliciano, Implication of neutrino backgrounds on the reach of next generation dark matter
direct detection experiments, Phys. Rev. D89 (2) (2014) 023524.
arXiv:1307.5458, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.89.023524.
[42] National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center, accessed: 2019-03-19 (2019).
[43] DOE to Build Next-Generation Supercomputer at Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory, accessed: 2019-03-19 (2019).
[44] P. J. W. Faulkner, et al., Gridpp: development of the uk computing grid for particle physics, J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys.
32 (1) (2006) N1. doi:10.1088/0954-3899/32/1/N01.
[45] D. Britton, et al., Gridpp: the uk grid for particle physics,
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 367 (1897) (2009) 2447–
2457. doi:10.1098/rsta.2009.0036.
[46] S. Agostinelli, et al., GEANT4: A Simulation toolkit,
Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A506 (2003) 250–303. doi:10.1016/
S0168-9002(03)01368-8.
[47] G. Barrand, et al., GAUDI - A software architecture and
framework for building HEP data processing applications,
Comput. Phys. Commun. 140 (2001) 45–55. doi:10.1016/
S0010-4655(01)00254-5.
[48] D. S. Akerib, et al., Simulations of Events for the LUX-ZEPLIN
(LZ) Dark Matter Experiment, In preparation (2019).
[49] D. S. Akerib, et al., LUXSim: A Component-Centric Approach
to Low-Background Simulations, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A675
(2012) 63–77. arXiv:1111.2074, doi:10.1016/j.nima.2012.
02.010.
[50] R. Brun, F. Rademakers, ROOT: An object oriented data
analysis framework, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A389 (1997) 81–86.
doi:10.1016/S0168-9002(97)00048-X.
[51] Gitlab Inc., accessed: 2015-12-07 (2015).
[52] J. Blomer, C. Aguado Sanchez, P. Buncic, A. Harutyunyan,
Distributing LHC application software and conditions databases
using the CernVM file system, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 331 (2011)
042003. doi:10.1088/1742-6596/331/4/042003.
[53] D. Dykstra, J. Blomer, Security in the CernVM File System and
the Frontier Distributed Database Caching System, J. Phys.
Conf. Ser. 513 (2014) 042015. doi:10.1088/1742-6596/513/4/
042015.

28

