Prepared for submission to JINST

arXiv:2505.01002v3 [physics.ins-det] 18 Sep 2025

High Voltage Delivery and Distribution for the NEXT-100
Time Projection Chamber

C. Adams,1,𝑎 H. Almazán,2 V. Álvarez,3 K. Bailey,1 R. Guenette,4 B.J.P. Jones,5
S. Johnston,1 K. Mistry,5 F. Monrabal,2,6 D.R. Nygren,5 B. Palmeiro,4 L. Rogers,1,𝑏
J. Waldschmidt,1 A.I. Aranburu,2 L. Arazi,7 I.J. Arnquist,8 F. Auria-Luna,9 S. Ayet,10
C.D.R. Azevedo,11 F. Ballester,3 J.E. Barcelon,2 M. del Barrio-Torregrosa,2,12 A. Bayo,13
J.M. Benlloch-Rodríguez,2 F.I.G.M. Borges,14 A. Brodolin,2,15 N. Byrnes,5 A. Castillo,2
E. Church,8 L. Cid,13 C.A.N. Conde,14,𝑏 C. Cortes-Parra,10 F.P. Cossío,9 R. Coupe,4
E. Dey,5 P. Dietz,2 C. Echevarria,2 M. Elorza,2,12 R. Esteve,3 R. Felkai,7,𝑐
L.M.P. Fernandes,16 P. Ferrario,2,6,𝑑 F.W. Foss,17 Z. Freixa,18,6 J. García-Barrena,3
J.J. Gómez-Cadenas,2,6,𝑒 J.W.R. Grocott,4 J. Hauptman,19 C.A.O. Henriques,16
J.A. Hernando Morata,20 P. Herrero-Gómez,21 V. Herrero,3 C. Hervés Carrete,20
Y. Ifergan,7 F. Kellerer,10 L. Larizgoitia,2,12 A. Larumbe,9 P. Lebrun,22 F. Lopez,2
N. López-March,10 R. Madigan,17 R.D.P. Mano,16 A. Marauri,9 A.P. Marques,14
J. Martín-Albo,10 A. Martínez,3 G. Martínez-Lema,7 M. Martínez-Vara,10 R.L. Miller,17
J. Molina-Canteras,9 C.M.B. Monteiro,16 F.J. Mora,3 K.E. Navarro,5 P. Novella,10 E. Oblak,2
J. Palacio,13 A. Para,22 I. Parmaksiz,5 A. Pazos,18 J. Pelegrin,2 M. Pérez Maneiro,20
M. Querol,10 J. Renner,10 I. Rivilla,9,2 C. Rogero,15 B. Romeo,2, 𝑓 C. Romo-Luque,10,𝑔
E. Ruiz-Chóliz,13 P. Saharia,10 F.P. Santos,14 J.M.F. dos Santos,16 M. Seemann,2,12
I. Shomroni,21 A.L.M. Silva,11 P.A.O.C. Silva,16 A. Simón,10 S.R. Soleti,2,6 M. Sorel,10
J. Soto-Oton,10 J.M.R. Teixeira,16 S. Teruel-Pardo,10 J.F. Toledo,3 C. Tonnelé,2 S. Torelli,2
J. Torrent,2,23 A. Trettin,4 P.R.G. Valle,2,18 M. Vanga,17 J.F.C.A. Veloso,11 J.D. Villamil,10
J. Waiton,4 A. Yubero-Navarro,2,12
1 Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL 60439, USA
2 Donostia International Physics Center, BERC Basque Excellence Research Centre, Manuel de Lardizabal

4, San Sebastián / Donostia, E-20018, Spain
3 Instituto de Instrumentación para Imagen Molecular (I3M), Centro Mixto CSIC - Universitat Politècnica

de València, Camino de Vera s/n, Valencia, E-46022, Spain
4 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Manchester University, Manchester. M13 9PL, United Kingdom
a Now at NVIDIA.
b Corresponding Author
c Deceased.
d Now at Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel.
e On leave.
f NEXT Spokesperson.
g Now at University of North Carolina, USA.
h Now at Los Alamos National Laboratory, USA.

5 Department of Physics, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, USA
6 Ikerbasque (Basque Foundation for Science), Bilbao, E-48009, Spain
7 Unit of Nuclear Engineering, Faculty of Engineering Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, P.O.B.

653, Beer-Sheva, 8410501, Israel
8 Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL), Richland, WA 99352, USA
9 Department of Organic Chemistry I, Universidad del Pais Vasco (UPV/EHU), Centro de Innovación en

Química Avanzada (ORFEO-CINQA), San Sebastián / Donostia, E-20018, Spain
10 Instituto de Física Corpuscular (IFIC), CSIC & Universitat de València, Calle Catedrático José Beltrán,

2, Paterna, E-46980, Spain
11 Institute of Nanostructures, Nanomodelling and Nanofabrication (i3N), Universidade de Aveiro, Campus

de Santiago, Aveiro, 3810-193, Portugal
12 Department of Physics, Universidad del Pais Vasco (UPV/EHU), PO Box 644, Bilbao, E-48080, Spain
13 Laboratorio Subterráneo de Canfranc, Paseo de los Ayerbe s/n, Canfranc Estación, E-22880, Spain
14 LIP, Department of Physics, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, 3004-516, Portugal
15 Centro de Física de Materiales (CFM), CSIC & Universidad del Pais Vasco (UPV/EHU), Manuel de

Lardizabal 5, San Sebastián / Donostia, E-20018, Spain
16 LIBPhys, Physics Department, University of Coimbra, Rua Larga, Coimbra, 3004-516, Portugal
17 Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, USA
18 Department of Applied Chemistry, Universidad del Pais Vasco (UPV/EHU), Manuel de Lardizabal 3, San

Sebastián / Donostia, E-20018, Spain
19 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011-3160, USA
20 Instituto Gallego de Física de Altas Energías, Univ. de Santiago de Compostela, Campus sur, Rúa Xosé

María Suárez Núñez, s/n, Santiago de Compostela, E-15782, Spain
21 Racah Institute of Physics, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 9190401, Israel
22 Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia, IL 60510, USA
23 Escola Politècnica Superior, Universitat de Girona, Av. Montilivi, s/n, Girona, E-17071, Spain

E-mail: leslie.rogers776@gmail.com
Abstract: A critical element in the realization of large liquid and gas time projection chambers
(TPCs) is the delivery and distribution of high voltages into and around the detector. Such experiments require of order tens of kilovolts to enable electron drift over meter-scale distances. This
paper describes the design and operation of the cathode feedthrough and high voltage distribution
through the field cage of the NEXT-100 experiment, an underground TPC that will search for
neutrinoless double beta decay 0𝜈𝛽𝛽. The feedthrough has been demonstrated to hold pressures
up to 20 bar and sustain voltages as high as -65 kV. The TPC is operating stably at its design high
voltages. The system has been realized within the constraints of a stringent radiopurity budget and
is now being used to execute a suite of sensitive double beta decay analyses.

Contents
1

Introduction

1

2

Field cage design

4

3

Cathode high voltage feedthrough
3.1 Feedthrough design
3.2 Assembly procedure
3.3 Installation and cabling

8
9
11
13

4

External system components

14

5

Radiopurity

15

6

Validation, commissioning and performance

16

7

Conclusion

18

1

Introduction

The Neutrino Experiment with a Xenon TPC (NEXT) program is the product of an international
collaboration aiming to develop a series of high pressure gas xenon Time Projection Chambers
(TPCs) to search for evidence of the Majorana nature of the neutrino through observation of neutrinoless double beta decay (0𝜈𝛽𝛽). The progression of NEXT detectors has increased exponentially
in scale between generations and aims to culminate in ton- to multi-ton scale modules that will
execute a world-leading search for 0𝜈𝛽𝛽. Small to mid-scale demonstrators have included NEXTDBDM [1] NEXT-DEMO [2] and NEXT-White [3]. These experiments have proven the detector
technology capable of excellent energy resolution with 1% full-width half maximum (FWHM) at
2.5 MeV [4], along with performing a measurement of the two-neutrino double beta decay background in 136 Xe [5], and a first search for 0𝜈𝛽𝛽 [6]. The current phase of the experiment is called
NEXT-100 [7] and schematically shown in Figs. 1 and 2.
Noble element TPCs operate in a variety of phases, both liquid and gas, for numerous types of
physics searches today [8–12]. As these experiments grow in size, the drift distances become longer,
and therefore, the voltages required increase. This scaling has often resulted in TPC experiments
unsuccessfully reaching their design field goals [13].
An advantage of gaseous xenon is that the track length of a decay particle is relatively long
compared with condensed phases, around 20 cm in 13.5 bar. When a double beta decay occurs
within NEXT-100, it creates an initial light signal from the excitations created when the decay
particles deposit their energy in the xenon, as well as ionization electrons. These electrons can be
imaged in three dimensions, and so the particle path can be reconstructed. A moderate electric field

–1–

Figure 1. Diagram of the NEXT-100 TPC which is held in pressurized xenon (HPGXe) with the energy
readout plane at the left consisting of 60 photomultiplier tubes (PMTs) held in vacuum. The cathode is held
at a high negative voltage with a buffer region behind it to safely step the voltage up from ground. The drift
field is a well controlled moderate electric field that moves electrons over to the electroluminescence region
where there is a high electric field that creates light amplification via electroluminescence, collected via the
PMTs for an energy readout, and 3584 silicon photo multipliers (SiPMs) for the tracking readout.

(O300-400 V/cm), the drift field, draws the ionized electrons to an electroluminescence region.
This region has a high electric field (O10 kV/cm) where the electrons gain sufficient energy to
excite the xenon atoms within their path. When an excited xenon atom de-excites it then releases a
photon, resulting in an electroluminescent gain process whereby each electron can generate 102 −103
secondary scintillation photons as it crosses the electroluminescence (EL) region. The XY location
of these photons is imaged via a tracking plane that consists of an array of silicon photomultipliers
(SiPMs). The third dimension of the event is encoded in the time of which the electrons produce
light in the EL region, which can then be converted to a Z component via the known electron drift
velocity. The event energy is also recorded, both in the SiPM array, and with finer precision using a
high photo-cathode coverage plane of photomultiplier tubes that count the total number of photons
created. The number of photons is proportional to the initial number of electrons with remarkably
low fluctuations, after correcting for losses during drift and local detector response maps. These
maps are continuously produced through calibration with a circulating gaseous 83m Kr source [14].
A measurement of energy with a resolution better than 1% FWHM is enabled [15] via collection
of secondary scintillation from the EL region. In this way, the NEXT EL TPCs represent precise
calorimetric 3D-imaging detectors. Operation of both the TPC and the EL region requires the
supply and distribution of a substantial DC voltage, of order 70 kV. A 3D model of the TPC system
for NEXT-100 with the relevant high voltage connections indicated is shown in Fig. 2.
The drift field requirements are driven by a number of factors. When the ionization track is

–2–

Figure 2. Left: Sketch of the field cage and TPC system, with the relevant high voltages indicated. See
text for details and Fig. 3 for a close-up of the components contained in the orange rectangle. Right: Cross
Section of the NEXT-100 detector design showing the field cage within a pressure vessel and connected to a
high voltage feedthrough which sits on top and is explained in more detail in Section 3.

created, the electric field must be sufficient to prevent 𝑒 − +Xe+ recombination. The drift velocity
should also be sufficiently high that the readout window associated with one event is short enough to
make pileup unlikely, or to induce performance degradation of the energy resolution due to electron
attachment on electronegative impurities in the gas. Uniformity of the field in the fiducial volume
must be maintained in order to protect the topology of the initial track, which encodes the type of
event that occurred and allows separation of signal from backgrounds [12]. Drifting electrons also
undergo both transverse and longitudinal diffusion, and the diffusion scale is minimized for larger
drift voltages and hence shorter drift times. As such, higher drift fields lead to more faithful images
of the original ionization deposits. All of these factors drive a requirement for an electric field of
order 300-400 V/cm, which is homogeneous at the sub-percent level. This field is created by a
“field cage”, in which conducting rings are held at graded potentials to ensure a uniform, parallel
field in the drift volume. An overview of the field cage design for NEXT-100 can be found in sec. 2.
To generate the drift field at design specification in NEXT-100, 400 V/cm in 13.5 bar of xenon
[16], a high voltage is applied to the cathode and stepped down along the field cage using a resistive
divider inside the vessel. This voltage, generated by a DC power supply outside the pressure vessel,
must enter through a penetration called the “cathode high voltage feedthrough” in order to meet the
cathode. This component is the subject of sec. 3. The design specification for the cathode voltage
is -65 kV, which is sufficient to both enable the required drift field and the needed voltage step up
of the electroluminescent region. The cathode itself is formed from a stretched, photochemically
etched mesh of 127 µm wire size over a two-part silicon bronze frame. Its design, as well as that of
the EL region, is described in detail in [17].

–3–

NEXT-100 also includes two further high voltage feedthroughs, which provide voltages for
the EL region. Since the operating parameters of this sub-system are similar to the prior iteration,
NEXT-White, the previous EL region feedthroughs were re-used for these parts [3]. Supply
and distribution of high voltage to the cathode and field cage in NEXT-100, however, required
significantly more advanced components than used in previous NEXT experiments [2, 3]. Realizing
these involved a program of design, R&D, and characterization, as well as adherence to a strict
radiopurity budget, described in sec. 5. This paper focuses on development and installation of the
cathode HVFT and The field cage for the NEXT-100 experiment. These components have been
instrumental in enabling the rapid commissioning and operation of NEXT-100, which is reached
and held its design high voltages following a brief commissioning period in argon and xenon gases.
Validation, commissioning and performance of the system are discussed in sec. 6.

2

Field cage design

The field cage consists of 52 copper rings (48 in the drift region and 4 for the buffer region) supported
on 18 high density polyethylene (HDPE) struts, as shown schematically in Fig. 3, and in detail in
Fig. 4. Attached to the struts are polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) reflectors. These components are
wrapped in a layer of HDPE “Poly Wrap" to insulate the high voltage electrodes from the internal
copper shielding that absorbs gamma radiation produced in the stainless steel of the vessel walls.
The complete field cage is 142.7 cm in length and 110.5 cm in diameter of which 118.7 cm
comprises the drift region (on the EL-region side of the cathode). The field cage design was
optimized to maximize the detector fiducial volume within the boundaries of the inner copper
shielding, as well as to minimize the mass of structural materials for radiopurity purposes. To
achieve both goals, the design is made with interconnecting components that slot together during
assembly, requiring minimal passive scaffolding and fixtures, and making efficient use of the
available volume. The entire field cage was assembled outside the pressure vessel as free-standing
horizontal cylinder and was slid inside as one piece. A schematic of the field cage can be seen in
Figure 3.
The copper field-shaping rings grade the potential uniformly along the drift field, stepping
down the voltage applied at the cathode. The rings have an internal (external) diameter of 101.4 cm
(103.8 cm), a shape of a rounded rectangle of dimensions 10 mm thickness, 8 mm width, 1 mm
rounded corners, and cross sectional area 1.2 cm2 . They are made in three segments and joined by
12 brass countersunk screws in order to facilitate machinability (Fig. 4,a). Finite element analyses
were performed to validate that the expected sag from using joined rings was not prohibitive to
maintaining the structural form of the assembled field cage. The copper rings ultimately provide
the main structural elements that maintain the shape of the cylinder, with the HDPE staves serving
primarily to fix each ring relative to the others. The edges of the copper rings are rounded to
avoid high electric field concentrations that could lead to dielectric breakdown or corona in the
surrounding xenon gas.
Between each two rings is a 1.4 cm edge-to-edge gap, spanned by three parallel arrays of filmchip-film resistors (CHRV100MEDKR-ND from Vishay Techno) of resistance 100 MΩ. The use of
parallel resistor chains provides redundancy in the event of a resistor failure, and positioning inside
the cage avoids exposure of the resistor edges to large electric fields. The resistors are soldered to

–4–

Figure 3. Left: Labeled cross section of the field cage centered at the cathode with the buffer region on the
right and drift to the left. Dimensions are provided for the cross section of the copper rings. Right: Internal
view of NEXT-100 from the energy plane side looking towards the SiPMs of the tracking plane. The gold
ring is the edge of the cathode which is holding a 95% transparent mesh. Note that the copper rings and
resistor boards are not visible from this angle.

small mounting boards of dimension 28 mm × 6 mm and 2.7 mm thickness manufactured from
Cuflon (a board with a core of PTFE and planes of copper) from the Polyflon company. One of the
resistor board chains can be seen in Fig. 4, c, where resistor boards are installed upside down every
other ring to facilitate their installation. The boards are mounted on the inside of the field cage rings
to minimize electrical discharges to the inner copper shield from sharp surfaces on the resistors and
each board is mounted 120 degrees from the other parallel boards between each field cage ring gap.
Both board material and resistors were screened for radiopurity [18] and found to be comfortably
within acceptable limits. A special resistor board spans the 2.45 cm gap between the last field cage
ring and the cathode with two resistors in parallel and one in series replicated three times around the
azimuth to provide appropriate field grading over the slightly large field-cage-to-cathode gap. The
total electrical resistance from the cathode to the last ring of the TPC, is designed to be 1.65 GΩ and
was measured to be 1.68 GΩ during installation using a series picoammeter. This small difference
has no important implication for the operating drift field.
In the opposite axial direction from the drift volume, a shorter series of four rings with 3.8 cm
gap between each ring extends from the cathode toward the energy plane, which is held at ground.
The field uniformity requirements in this region are far less stringent, so in order to minimize both
radiopurity load and failure modes these rings do not have resistors between them, instead relying
on the resistivity of the polyethylene frame to grade the voltage.
The HDPE struts provide structural support for the field cage and run the entire detector length.
To attach to the copper rings, they have “comb” features cut into them. Similarly, the HDPE struts
have a groove on the inside to hug the cathode and, as such, were assembled piece by piece around
the cathode. This scheme is shown in Figure 3. The copper rings are attached with nylon screws to
the HDPE struts, and one of these screws, as can be seen in Fig. 4, a.
Attached to the field cage HDPE struts are individual panels of PTFE reflector material with
0.5 cm thickness. These reflectors slide into the struts with a dovetail joint to create a light-tube,
lining the active volume to enhance photon collection efficiency. These panels are also coated in
the wavelength shifter Tetraphenyl Butadiene (TPB) with a thickness of a few microns. Although

–5–

Figure 4. Details of the field cage construction. a. connections of the segmented copper rings; b. assembled
cage structure with all struts and rings installed and HV cable visible around the outer circumference; c.
one of three parallel resistor chains running up the inside of the field cage; d. installation of the wavelength
shifting PTFE reflectors. See text for details.

the sapphire windows of NEXT-100 will transmit UV light, and the photomultiplier tubes have
some sensitivity the xenon emission wavelength of 175 nm, the better PMT quantum efficiency at
the TPB emission peak leads to improved energy resolution with the application of a wavelength
shifter. A program of R&D has quantified the reflectivity of NEXT-100 style PTFE panels vs
thickness [19], and it was found that 0.5 cm thick panels offer excellent reflectivity while avoiding
unnecessary additional material mass. It is notable that this is somewhat different to the optimal
thickness for liquid xenon experiments [20, 21], where PTFE reflectivity is significantly enhanced
due to the high refractive index of the liquid leading to increased fresnel reflectivity [22], which is
a thickness-independent effect. In the gas phase, the reflectivity is primarily due to diffusion of the
photons within the PTFE volume, and it therefore exhibits a more significant thickness dependence.
Where previous NEXT detectors have used a solid light tube, these panels were produced in
sections to make coating with TPB more straightforward and controllable, and installation more
manageable. Installation of one of the panels is shown in Fig. 4, d. Due to their modularity, it
is anticipated that a similar design can be used for larger future detectors, following validation of
performance in NEXT-100.
The mass of the field cage is 270.7 kg (excluding the Poly Wrap) and is overwhelmingly
dominated by copper, HDPE, and PTFE, at 177.9 kg, 54 kg, and 38.8kg, respectively. All of this
weight is supported via the copper rings. To check if the rings could support this structure, a finite
element analysis was used to evaluate the rings throughout the system as shown in Figure 5 Left. It
was determined that the structure was mechanically robust with inconsequential deformation in the
rings, with less than 0.05 mm of deflection from the nominal cylindrical shape everywhere within
the region of interest. A stress analysis was also performed for the rings and found to be trivial

–6–

Figure 5. Left: Total deformation expected from the copper rings in the field cage which produce the
mechanical support to hold everything together. This simulation took into account the weight of all the
plastics and the rings themselves with the largest deformation occurring at the top of the buffer region where
there is a larger ring spacing resulting in the rings each having to support more mass. Even in this area there
is trivial deformation expected of 0.05 mm. Right: Total deformation expected from the field cage HDPE
struts and light panels once assembled. The deformation simulation took into account the weight of the
plastics and demonstrates a robust design with a maximum of 2.1 mm near the center of the drift field region.

throughout, with a max of 2.71 MPa at the peak deflection area.
Since the PTFE panels are a significant portion of the weight and cantilever out on either side
of the dove tail where it slides into the HDPE struts, this deformation mode was also studied. The
results can be seen in Figure 5 Right. There is more deformation than the copper rings alone, with
a maximum of 2.1 mm sag in the center area of the drift region. This was determined to be within
our tolerances, and is not expected to impact either the high voltage distribution or the uniformity
of light collection.
The Poly Wrap is made from two layers of 0.5 cm thick of HDPE. It is wrapped around the
field cage to insulate the high voltage electrodes from the internal copper shielding. The inner layer
makes a nearly complete turn of the cylinder leaving just a thin seam at the bottom of the detector.
The outer layer runs around 40% the circumference to cover this remaining seam. This structure
prevents the occurrence of an electrical breakdown from the cathode to the pressure vessel across
the few-cm xenon gas gap that separates them. The dielectric strength of HDPE sheet was tested
in parallel plate conditions prior to installation and proven to exceed the design strength required at
the cathode with a safety factor of at least two.
A high voltage cable is connected to the cathode and wound around the field cage (as can be
seen in Fig. 4,b) until it gets near the EL region, where it then exits from the top of the pressure
vessel. Because the absolute voltages become smaller near the EL region, it becomes admissible
to break the Poly Wrap near to this end of the field cage without risk of discharges to the copper
shielding. The cathode high voltage cable thus emerges from the Poly Wrap near the EL region and
turns outward to meet the cathode high voltage feed through. Along the path where the high voltage
cable curves around the outside of the field the HDPE struts have shorter ridges to accommodate
the cable outside the field cage but inside the Poly Wrap.
Simulations of the electric field in the NEXT-100 field cage were performed using COMSOL

–7–

and can be seen in Fig. 6. These simulations use a 2D-axisymmetric approximation to evaluate the
radial and axial components of the electric field. A 20 mm fiducial cut from the PTFE walls is
found to be sufficient to ensure a uniform drift field for double beta decay measurements.

Figure 6. Left: Simulations of the electric field in the NEXT-100 field cage using COMSOL assuming
operating voltages of -70 kV at the cathode and -20 kV at the gate. This corresponds to a constant and
homogeneous electric field of ∼400 V cm−1 within the operating region of the detector. Right: Reduced
electric field along z at a radial distance 20 mm from the PTFE walls. Both images are reproduced from [23].

3

Cathode high voltage feedthrough

The centerpiece of the NEXT-100 high voltage system is the cathode high voltage feedthrough. The
HVFT has to be capable of stably holding voltages to the operating specification of -65 kV without
charge-up, breakdown, or dielectric deterioration. It delivers voltage from outside the vessel, i.e.
air at atmospheric pressure, to the cathode which is mounted inside the inner copper shield, Poly
Wrap, and field cage. The required operational pressure conditions vary from vacuum during the
pump-down phases to pressures of to 13.5 bar (the maximum certified pressure of the NEXT-100
vessel) of xenon gas during physics data taking. The feedthrough must be hermetic and provide
an excellent seal even when pressurized, to avoid both loss of valuable 136 Xe and inward diffusion
of electronegative atmospheric impurities that impede TPC function. In addition to these basic
requirements, the feedthrough must be made from radiopure materials so as not to be a major source
of backgrounds for the experiment.
The HVFT is manufactured from four custom components, as shown in Fig. 7. The outer tube
is a stainless steel 316 cylinder that acts as a grounding shield when connected to the grounded
pressure vessel. Within the grounding shield, there is a thick insulating sheath made of Ultra High
Molecular Weight (UHMW) polyethylene. Inside the sheath, the electrical connections between
internal and external cables are securely made and protected from sparking to ground. The final
critical component is the inner copper pin, which is precision-machined to cryo-fit inside the
sheath and couple securely to both internal and external insulated high-voltage cables. Electrical
connections are made by feeding cables from either side of the HVFT until the ends are securely
inserted into the copper connector pin. Once the banana plug connections are secure, the external
part of the cable is clamped to the feedthrough with some compressive force applied to the inner
cable insulator to keep the connection in place.

–8–

Figure 7. Cross section of the feedthrough showing the insulating polyethylene surrounding the copper pin,
all within a grounding shield. The orientation shown has the power supply output coming in from the right
and the vessel connection at the left. In the upper right, there is a close-up of the copper pin showing the
difference in diameters and the taper between them.

3.1

Feedthrough design

Although the HVFT necessarily contains large masses of material to avoid breakdown, it is situated
mostly outside of the pressure vessel and the inner copper shielding, so radiopurity constraints are
relaxed relative to other NEXT field cage and voltage distribution components. Nevertheless, to
avoid large backgrounds from materials near the detector and inside its shielding castle, materials
were selected and sourced for their radiopurity, and material mass was minimized as far as reasonably
possible. To avoid the significant addition of sealing hardware, glues, or greases, interference fits
were employed throughout. The interference fits are made by placing a cooled piece that would be
oversized at room temperature within a warmer, undersized part and using pressure at the contact
points created by thermal expansion to hold the components together. This fit must be robust enough
to create a vacuum and pressure seal. This requires both radial and frictional forces, creating stresses
within materials and has to be carefully optimized to prevent fractures. The radial force induces
radial stress, causing compression, tangential stress, and tension. In addition, the friction force
induces shear stresses leading to both tension and compression in the system [24].
The radii of the components for cryofit must thus be calculated and precisely machined since
an over-tight fit will result in fractures, creating routes for leaks, whereas a loose fit will not
produce a pressure seal. This mechanical challenge is exacerbated by the difficulty of precisely
machining large polyethylene parts. Several prototypes were developed at the Argonne National
Laboratory machine shop in order to perfect production for effective cryofit. The results of this
R&D included the development of a custom tooling bit to machine the two diameters and the taper
into the polyethylene in one step. Other multi-step machining trials were explored, though the one
presented here led to the highest quality surface finish.

–9–

Figure 8. Simulation of the electric fields within the feedthrough when operating at 100 kV. The peak fields
on the exterior of the polyethylene are less than 3 MV/m while the fields within the cable channel, and
especially near the copper pin, are as high as 10 MV/m in air.

The initial choice for an insulating sheath was HDPE rather than UHMW as it is the most
stable while sustaining high electric fields [25]. However, our R&D showed that when subjected
to liquid nitrogen temperatures, it became brittle, leading to frequent cracks and leaks. UHMW
was then selected as a second material choice. The coefficient of thermal expansion for UHMW
polyethylene was determined empirically after the numbers in literature were found to be widely
scattered [26, 27] and ultimately unreliable compared to our in-house studies. This proved to be a
crucial step for achieving a good seal. Each batch of UHMW was measured before machining in
order to calculate the appropriate oversizing dimensions to fit inside the grounding tube. This was
accomplished by measuring the width of a block of material under various temperatures to find the
rate of expansion versus temperature and sizing the cryo-fit part accordingly.
The shape of the insulating polyethylene part of the HVFT was chosen to minimize high
electric field concentrations that can seed breakdown or dielectric degradation. This is shown in
Fig. 8. The ends of the insulating layer are tapered to gradually reduce the field gradients and avoid
creepage current or surface charge migration. Around the connector pin the outer diameter of the
insulator is reduced, creating an air gap to force a reduction in the electric field around the copper
pin where the non-uniform surface geometry creates varying fields. The dielectric strength of the
batch of UHMW used was 90 MV/m (per the manufacturers’ specification), and our simulations
showed that fields of this scale within the HVFT sheath were in principle possible, if any sharp
edges remained around the connections. As an additional precaution, a VCR port was included
on the first HVFT manufactured so that the gap around the polyethylene insulator could be filled
with gases that have a higher dielectric strength than air, such as SF6 , or with vacuum grease, if
needed. No breakdowns were observed during testing, discussed in more detail in Section 6, so the
gas hookup was omitted from later versions. Eventually, the final HVFT as installed on NEXT-100
was potted with a small quantity of epoxy in the upper cable space to minimize diffusion of xenon
through the outer interference fit, in anticipation of the enriched 136 Xe run.

– 10 –

The HVFT connects the cable from inside the vessel to the outer cable via the internal copper
pin. This pin is machined from a rod of oxygen-free high thermal conductivity copper, and has
two diameters with a 10 degree taper between them as shown in Fig. 7. The two steps and
taper are larger on the vessel end as an added safety measure to prevent the connector pin from
becoming a projectile under failure at high pressure. The copper connector has two base diameters
on which several trapezoidal protrusions were machined. These protrusions were intended to
increase interference with the polyethylene and keep any superficial defects on the surface from
compromising a complete pressure seal. Each end of the connector pin is tapped and counter bored
to accept a brass 5/16” socket head cap screw (SHCS) that was modified to accept a short banana
plug. Once inserted into the SHCS and connector pin, the cable insulator sits flush against the
connector pin, avoiding space for dielectric discharges.
The holes in the HDPE sheath of the HVFT where the cables are inserted are machined to a
diameter larger than that of the cable with the grounding braid removed. These holes should be
small enough to direct the cable straight into the pin, but (in particular on the inside) large enough
not to trap gas to create a virtual leak when at vacuum or pressure. Furthermore, in early prototypes
we found that if the fit was too tight, it would compress air behind the cable during insertion and
pushes the cable back out of place, either immediately or over time. The ideal diameter of the holes
in the sheath was determined empirically based on these considerations to be 20.3 mm, 1 mm larger
than the cable diameter.
3.2

Assembly procedure

The HVFT assembly requires minimal tooling, as most part matings are accomplished using
interference fits. The only tool required was a 5/16" hex rod at least 50 cm long and a threaded rod
at least ∼30 cm in length. We also produced a special “installation jig” for holding the polyethylene
sheath vertically and for ease of manipulation. Several systems are used for temperature control
of various part to accomplish cryo-fits, including a double walled dewar filled with liquid nitrogen
for cooling and a commercial sous vide immersion heater for warming. A diagram illustrating
installation steps is shown in Fig. 9.
Prior to assembly, all pieces were cleaned by wiping down with ethanol and allowed to dry. The
insulating HDPE sheath is placed inside a plastic bag and then submerged in a water bath warmed
to 65◦ C using the immersion heater. The plastic bag keeps water from entering the polyethylene
inner cavity and impeding the installation, as trapped water will not compress and will inhibit the
interference fit. While the water is heating, the threaded rod is affixed to the wide end of the
copper pin. After the insulator has come to temperature for 30 minutes the pin can be placed into
the warmed and now expanded insulating tube from the short cone end as shown in Fig. 9. The
assembly is then allowed to return to room temperature.
The grounding tube is placed securely on a base with room for the polyethylene to emerge from
bottom end. The installation jig is attached to the polyethylene/copper assembly and then placed in
a dewar. The dewar is filled with liquid nitrogen until at least the widest section of the insulator is
covered. This will enables safe and convenient handling with cryo-safety gloves. After at least 20
minutes of dwell time the polyethylene is removed and inserted into the grounding tube, with the
cold end up. If the parts have been properly sized, the UHMW contracts sufficiently to slide snugly
into place against an internal lip without hammering or forcing.

– 11 –

Figure 9. Assembly procedures for the HVFT. Step 1 is freezing the pin and heating the polyethylene to
reduce and expand the diameters, respectively, before inserting them together for an interference fit. Step 2
mounts the grounding tube to a base while freezing the bottom of the insulating polyethylene. In order for
gravity to aid in the cryo-fit, in step 3 the part is flipped so that the cooled end is resting against the grounding
tube and the non-cooled side extends freely into the base support. Step 4 adds adapters to the copper pin to
be able to take banana plugs from the HV cables later as well as attaching the conical top.

Once the assembly has recovered to room temperature and the polyethylene has expanded, the
installation jig is removed and the hex rod is used to insert and screw brass banana plug adapters
in on both sides of the copper pin. Vacuum and hydrostatic pressure testing can be performed at
this point. The conical steel cap is fabricated with excess material on the mating flange. The final
operation is to machine the thickness of the flange down so the conic section of the polyethylene
meets the interior conic section of the cap to provide an electrical boundary and avoid creepage
current forming along the polyethylene surface. Once attached to the grounding tube, this completes
the grounding layer around the insulator.

– 12 –

Figure 10. High voltage cable preparation for inserting into the HVFT from outside the vessel. Left shows
a cross section view of the cable layers. Right shows the relative lengths each layer is stripped to before
assembly.

3.3

Installation and cabling

Installation of the HVFT onto the detector is a straightforward operation, though some cable
preparation is required. The cables used on both sides of the feedthrough are Dielectric Sciences
item 2134 which has 5 layers and is shown in Fig. 10. To begin, 7 mm of the conductive center is
exposed at the tips of the cables, removing the outer layers. Within the vessel, the cable is stripped
entirely of its PVC jacket and grounding braid (labeled as "grounding shield" in Fig. 10). Internally
to the vessel there is no ground braid on the cable, which spirals up the field cage from low voltage
toward the high voltage cathode, where the potential difference between the inside and outside of
the cable becomes zero. The exposed conductive centers of both the internal and external cables
connecting to the HVFT have banana plugs affixed to them via conductive epoxy, specifically,
two-part MG Chemicals 8331-14G Silver Conductive Epoxy High Conductivity.
To connect to the cathode, center conductor requires a robust mechanical and electrical connection on the cathode. For this purpose, we machined a custom connector piece from brass, as shown
in Fig. 11 right. It has rounded and smoothed edges to minimize drastic electric fields arising from
sharp points. The connector has a slot on the bottom that matches the width of the cathode edge
and is secured in place on the cathode frame with brass set screws. The conductive center of the
cable inserts into a hole on the side of the connector and secures with additional brass set screws
from the top. The cable is measured to be long enough to wrap helically around the field cage from
the cathode to then emerge from a port at the top of the pressure vessel over the EL region. Enough
cable is extended out from within the vessel to be fully inserted into the HVFT.
To install the HVFT onto the vessel, the assembled feedthrough is lifted above the port and then
brought down close to the flange. The high voltage cable emerging from the detector can then be
guided through the center of the insulating polyethylene. When the banana plug reaches the copper
pin there is some resistance before slotting in. The same resistance is needed to disconnect the
banana plug, ensuring a solid electrical connection. Due to the geometry of the feedthrough port,
cable strain tends to cause the cable to bend and slip backward into the vessel before fully inserting.
To prevent this, we use a cable clamp as shown in Fig. 11 Left. This is a custom-machined UHMW
piece that clamps the cable to the feedthrough plastic set screws inserted on the sides. The diameter
is larger than the port bore hole so that it cannot be pushed down into the vessel.
The HVFT mates to the vessel via a DN180 O-ring flange which provides both a mechanical
fixture and a pressure seal. This flange is designed to take reusable rubber rings during prototyping
stages or single-use ultra-high vacuum capable HELICOFLEX© rings during operation. Either

– 13 –

Figure 11. Left: UHMW clamp used to hold cable secure in the flange so it does not back off during
installation into the HVFT. The red circle is a visualization of where the o-ring will sit once assembled.
Right: connection of HV to the cathode.

ring type is placed in a groove on the bottom of the HVFT, creating a seal as it is tightened against
the flat surface seen in Fig. 11 Left. The bolts used to tighten the HVFT to the vessel provide an
immediate electrical grounding of the outer feedthrough sheath to the vessel ground. The cable
outside the vessel is stripped of its PVC layer the depth into the HVFT plus a few centimeters, while
the grounding braid is a few centimeters shorter, shown in Fig. 10 Right. The external cable is
then inserted through the HVFT until the banana plug is seated in the copper pin. The exposed
grounding braid on the cable is then spread over the conical top of the HVFT and secured with
a metallic hose clamp providing a continuous grounding shield. The fully installed assembly is
shown in Fig. 15 Right.

4

External system components

The cathode voltage for NEXT-100 is supplied by a commercial high voltage DC power supply (HCP
140-100000 from Fug). The cable used for the HVFT has dimensions different from the output
cable of the chosen high voltage power supply, 19.3 mm vs 9.4 mm outer diameters respectively,
and as such these two cables needed to be spliced externally to the vessel. This is done within a
grounded oil-filled vessel (“splice pot”) that was modeled off a filter pot design used by the LArIAT
experiment [28].
The splice pot is made from a 100 Qt aluminum stewpot and filled with transformer oil,
providing a volume of insulating material for the electrical connection between the two cables to
be made, suppressing possible electrical discharges and keeping the outer casing safely at ground.
The lid is welded down, and a smaller opening is made in the top for an adapter flange with two KF
fittings for incoming and outgoing cables. Attached to the KF fittings are two insulating tubes made
from G10 that sit inside the transformer oil and are connected via a copper bar across the bottom.

– 14 –

Figure 12. Assembly procedures for the Splice Pot with a picture of the NEXT-100 splice pot assembled
and installed at the Laboratorio Subterráneo de Canfranc. Step 1 is filling the splice pot with transformer
oil. Step 2 is building the G10 tube onto the KF flange followed by Step 3 where they are attached to the
adapter flange. Step 4 is the copper bar assembly where the cables will make contact. Step 5 combines the
G10 tubes to the copper bar assembly, and step 6 puts it into the transformer oil.

To manufacture, a G10 collar was epoxied to a G10 tube and the KF flange. This was repeated
twice and once the epoxy was fully cured, the KF flanges were be bolted onto the adapter flange.
The copper bar was then attached to the ends of the G10 tubes using brass bolts and G10 caps, with
the heads of the brass bolts creating the connections against the high voltage cables upon insertion.
The adapter flange was then be bolted onto the pot with the copper assembly fully submerged in
transformer oil. The pot is filled with enough room to insert the G10 tubes without spillages, and
left filled for its operating lifetime. A diagram of the installation steps is shown in Fig. 12.
To ensure a solid electrical connection from the inner conductors of the cables to the brass
screws at the bottom of the G10 tubes, a rounded brass thumbtack was pressed into the end of the
conductive section of the cable. The cables were stripped of their rubber casing a few cm longer
than the depth of where the cable would reach from the top of the splice pot to the bottom of the
G10 tubes, and the ground braid was stripped to 1-2 cm shorter than that depth. The cable was then
fed through its KF adapter before it is inserted into the top of the splice pot. Once the cable has
reached the bottom, the KF adapter flange was secured to the pot, and the ground braid is splayed
over the top. Pressing down on the cable to ensure a solid connection at the bottom, a hose clamp
was then clamped down over the ground braid to hold the cable securely in place. To add a level of
safety redundancy, the splice pot is grounded directly to the system ground as well using a braided
cable attached to one of the lid bolts.

5

Radiopurity

The field cage presents one of the most serious radiopurity challenges since it contains a large mass
of material and sits close to the active volume and is not shielded by the inner copper shield like the

– 15 –

HVFT. Careful selection and validation of field cage materials were thus required in order to meet
the radioactive background specifications. Sourcing and validating these materials represented
an important aspect of the system design and manufacture. The main radioactive backgrounds
in NEXT originate from gamma rays via 208 Tl (2.615 MeV) and 214 Bi (2.448 MeV) which are
produced in the natural radioactive chains from 232 Th and 238 U respectively [29, 30]. To check
the appropriateness of materials, in most cases we assay for 232 Th and 238 U and assume secular
equilibrium to predict the gamma activity. The individual materials were radioassayed at Pacific
Northwest National Laboratory and the Laboratorio Subterráneo de Canfranc using an inductivelycoupled plasma-mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) method. The measurements are shown in Table
1.
Component
Field cage resistors
Light Reflectors
Poly Wrap plus struts
Field cage rings

Material
PTFE
HDPE
Copper

232 Th [ppt]

238 U [ppt]

(0.22 ± 0.02) × 106

(0.28 ± 0.01) × 106

2.6 ± 0.1
15 ± 5
<0.8

4.9 ± 1.0
3±1
<0.6

Total Mass
50 mg
55.2 kg
88.3 kg
177.9 kg

Table 1. The radioactivity measurements (arranged in decreasing total activity) and total mass of the
components in the field cage. The resistors are made of several materials and are thus left unspecified. Only
components that contribute to a total activity of 232 Th and 238 U greater than than 1 mBq are included.

The total expected contribution to the background index of NEXT-100 from both the field cage
and the HVFT will be acceptably low for both 208 Tl and 214 Bi contributions based on these results.

6

Validation, commissioning and performance

To validate the HVFTs, several tests were carried out including high-pressure validation, helium
leak testing, high voltage performance under realistic detector conditions, and current and voltage
stability measurements.
To validate the high-pressure performance, the vessel attachment end was capped and the
conical top removed so that the end could be attached to a hydrostatic testing machine. It was
hydrostatically tested to 20.7 bar where it maintained that pressure for 10 minutes before being
removed and was deemed safe for installation on a 15 bar max vessel. Each HVFT was then helium
leak tested and demonstrated to be capable of vacuum lower than 10−5 Torr, with expectations of
being significantly better than if put under vacuum alone rather than with a vessel filled with other
components that are outgassing. Finally, each HVFT was installed onto the NEXT-100 prototype
located at Argonne National Lab, called NEXT-CRAB, a scaled-up version of the system described
in Ref. [31]. This allowed each to be tested under similar conditions to NEXT-100, including
attachment to a field cage made of copper rings connected by a resistor chain that generates a
uniform drift field in the detector. In this test, the vessel was first evacuated before being filled
with 4.0 bar of nitrogen. Nitrogen has a higher breakdown point than xenon as shown in Fig. 13
and therefore can demonstrate the HV capabilities at a lower total pressure. All feedthroughs were
slowly ramped down to -70 kV, -5kV more than the required operating voltage of NEXT-100 for

– 16 –

Figure 13. Breakdown voltage for various gases and pressures the HVFT are used with, simulated with
PyBoltz [32, 33] using the Townsend model.

400 V/cm drift field, and maintained at that voltage for at least 2 hours. During that time, there were
no breakdowns and the voltage remained constant. The ramping up of voltage was operated at a
maximum of 10 V/s to allow the field cage time to set at the voltage. This procedure has resulted in
no electrical breakdowns or instabilities in the feedthroughs. Tests to find the maximum operating
voltage of the feedthroughs were not carried out due to risk of damage caused by the discharges.
To validate the current and voltage stability and output, we compare the measured current at the
power supplies with the predictions as calculated from Ohm’s law. In these tests, the last ring of the
field cage was also held at voltage to ensure a uniform and predictable drift field. The results of these
measurements are shown in Fig.14 left. The large error bars from NEXT-CRAB measurements
are due to the low precision of the system’s current readout. Also, because the resistors along the
field cage are quite large (∼50MΩ), this results in relatively low current draws that never exceed
0.05 mA.
Following the validation of the feedthoughs in NEXT-CRAB, one HVFT remained on this
system where it is now in use with 0.5 bar mixture of 2% xenon and 98% argon for continuing R&D
toward NEXT-HD [34]. The voltage has been demonstrated to reach and hold -70 kV consistently
under these conditions over several months of intermittent operation and multiple ramps up and
down.
The other radiopure feedthough was installed and commissioned on the larger scale NEXT-100
vessel. During the commissioning, the detector was first operated in nitrogen gas before moving
to an operation of several months in argon, and now currently in xenon gas for data taking at
4.2 bar. The operation voltages on the cathode, pressures, and drift fields are shown in Table 2. The
voltages in argon and xenon were chosen to operate below the expected breakdown based on the
corresponding operation in nitrogen gas (Fig. 13) and prior measurements and calculations [33].
During these operations in different gas configurations, the voltage was stable with no electrical

– 17 –

Figure 14. Left: Results from both HVFT and splice pot assemblies running in 4.0 bar of nitrogen gas
for prototype NEXT-CRAB and for the NEXT-100 detector. The 𝑦 axis is the measured current and 𝑥 axis
is calculated from the measured voltage and resistance across the field cages. Right: Current stability of
NEXT-100 feedthrough in 4.2 bar of argon.

breakdowns. In addition, the cathode current has also been stable as shown in Fig.14, right.
A higher-pressure run in xenon for NEXT-100 at 13.5 bar is expected once a reinforcement
of the energy plane has been installed. Referring back to Fig. 13, the 4.2 bar measurements in
xenon can be extrapolated to operation in xenon at 13.5 bar. This scaling yields ∼-69 kV, which is
sufficient to meet the design specifications of a 400 V/cm drift field.
These tests demonstrate the successful design, construction and validation of the NEXT-100
cathode HVFT design, which is successfully operating in the experiment.
Gas
Nitrogen
Argon
Xenon

Pressure [bar]
4.0
4.2
4.2

Voltage [kV]
-62.5
-14.7
-23.0

Drift field [V/cm]
400
65
146

Table 2. Operational pressures, voltages at the cathode, and drift fields achieved during the commissioning
and present operation of NEXT-100.

7

Conclusion

The NEXT collaboration has demonstrated a robust cathode high voltage feedthrough (Fig. 15,
left) design and distribution system that can stably provide voltages to at least -65 kV via a
radiopure field cage (Fig. 15, right). The system was manufactured according to the principles
of minimizing radioactivity and maximizing HV robustness. System operation to date has been
successful, achieving the design high voltage quickly during the commissioning period of NEXT100 in various drift media. The feedthrough design is adaptable to future TPCs and appears scalable
for next-generation systems that require higher voltages and larger detector scales. This system is

– 18 –

Figure 15. Left: HVFT installed on NEXT-100. Right: field cage prior to installation into the vessel.

operating now at the heart of the NEXT-100 experiment, which will proceed to search for 0𝜈𝛽𝛽
using high pressure xenon gas.

Acknowledgements
The NEXT Collaboration acknowledges support from the following agencies and institutions: the
European Research Council (ERC) under Grant Agreement No. 951281-BOLD; the European
Union’s Framework Programme for Research and Innovation Horizon 2020 (2014–2020) under
Grant Agreement No. 957202-HIDDEN; the MCIN/AEI of Spain and ERDF A way of making
Europe under grants PID2021-125475NB and RTI2018-095979, and the Severo Ochoa and María
de Maeztu Program grants CEX2023-001292-S, CEX2023-001318-M and CEX2018-000867-S;
the Generalitat Valenciana of Spain under grants PROMETEO/2021/087 and CISEJI/2023/27;
the Department of Education of the Basque Government of Spain under the predoctoral training
program non-doctoral research personnel; the Spanish la Caixa Foundation (ID 100010434) under
fellowship code LCF/BQ/PI22/11910019; the Portuguese FCT under project UID/FIS/04559/2020
to fund the activities of LIBPhys-UC; the Israel Science Foundation (ISF) under grant 1223/21; the
Pazy Foundation (Israel) under grants 310/22, 315/19 and 465; the US Department of Energy under
contracts number DE-AC02-06CH11357 (Argonne National Laboratory), DE-AC02-07CH11359
(Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory), DE-FG02-13ER42020 (Texas A&M), DE-SC0019054
(Texas Arlington) and DE-SC0019223 and DE-SC0024438 (Texas Arlington); the US National
Science Foundation under award number NSF CHE 2004111; the Robert A Welch Foundation
under award number Y-2031-20200401. Finally, we are grateful to the Laboratorio Subterráneo de
Canfranc for hosting and supporting the NEXT experiment.

– 19 –

References
[1] V. Álvarez, F. Borges, S. Cárcel, J. Castel, S. Cebrián, A. Cervera, C. A. Conde, T. Dafni, T. Dias,
J. Díaz, et al., Near-intrinsic energy resolution for 30–662 kev gamma rays in a high pressure xenon
electroluminescent tpc, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A:
Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment 708 (2013) 101–114.
[2] V. Álvarez et al., Initial results of next-demo, a large-scale prototype of the next-100 experiment,
Journal of Instrumentation 8 (2013), no. 04 P04002.
[3] F. Monrabal et al., The next white (new) detector, Journal of Instrumentation 13 (dec, 2018) P12010.
[4] NEXT Collaboration, J. Renner et al., Energy calibration of the NEXT-White detector with 1%
resolution near Q𝛽𝛽 of 136 Xe, J. High Energ. Phys. 10 (2019) 230, [arXiv:1905.13110].
[5] NEXT Collaboration, P. Novella et al., Measurement of the 136 Xe two-neutrino double beta decay
half-life via direct background subtraction in NEXT, Phys. Rev. C 105 (May, 2022)
[arXiv:2111.11091].
[6] NEXT Collaboration, C. Adams and others, Demonstration of neutrinoless double beta decay
searches in gaseous xenon with next, arXiv:2305.09435.
[7] V. Álvarez et al., Next-100 technical design report (tdr). executive summary, JINST 7 (2012), no. 06
T06001.
[8] V. A. Kudryavtsev, Recent results from lux and prospects for dark matter searches with lz, Universe 5
(2019), no. 3.
[9] T2K ND280 TPC collaboration, Time Projection Chambers for the T2K Near Detectors, 2010.
[10] K. Ackermann et al., A study with a small prototype tpc for the international linear collider
experiment, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators,
Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment 623 (2010), no. 1 141–143. 1st International
Conference on Technology and Instrumentation in Particle Physics.
[11] X. She et al., Development of time projection chamber prototype integrated with uv laser tracks for the
future circular e+e- collider, Journal of Instrumentation 18 (jul, 2023) C07015.
[12] NEXT Collaboration, P. Ferrario et al., First proof of topological signature in the high pressure xenon
gas TPC with electroluminescence amplification for the NEXT experiment, JHEP 01 (2016) 104,
[arXiv:1507.05902].
[13] T. Shutt, “Some design considerations for xlzd and beyond.” https://indico.slac.stanford.
edu/event/8015/contributions/7088/attachments/3477/9650/KTonneXLZD.pdf, 2023.
Accessed: 2025-04-14.
[14] NEXT Collaboration, G. Martínez-Lema, J. H. Morata, B. Palmeiro, A. Botas, P. Ferrario,
F. Monrabal, A. Laing, J. Renner, A. Simón, A. Para, et al., Calibration of the NEXT-White detector
using 83𝑚 Kr decays, JINST 13 (2018), no. 10 P10014, [arXiv:1804.01780].
[15] J. Renner, G. Díaz López, P. Ferrario, J. Hernando Morata, M. Kekic, G. Martínez-Lema, F. Monrabal,
J. J. Gómez-Cadenas, C. Adams, V. Álvarez, et al., Energy calibration of the next-white detector with
1% resolution near q𝛽𝛽 of 136xe, Journal of High Energy Physics 2019 (2019), no. 10 1–13.
[16] NEXT Collaboration, Álvarez, V. and others, The NEXT-100 experiment for neutrinoless double beta
decay searches (Conceptual Design Report), arXiv:1106.3630.
[17] K. Mistry et al., Design, characterization and installation of the next-100 cathode and
electroluminescence regions, Journal of Instrumentation 19 (Feb., 2024) P02007.

– 20 –

[18] V. Alvarez, I. Bandac, A. Bettini, F. Borges, S. Carcel, J. Castel, S. Cebrián, A. Cervera, C. Conde,
T. Dafni, et al., Radiopurity control in the next-100 double beta decay experiment: procedures and
initial measurements, Journal of Instrumentation 8 (2013), no. 01 T01002.
[19] J. Haefner, A. Fahs, J. Ho, C. Stanford, R. Guenette, C. Adams, H. Almazán, V. Álvarez, B. Aparicio,
A. Aranburu, et al., Reflectance and fluorescence characteristics of ptfe coated with tpb at visible, uv,
and vuv as a function of thickness, Journal of Instrumentation 18 (2023), no. 03 P03016.
[20] F. Neves, A. Lindote, A. Morozov, V. Solovov, C. Silva, P. Bras, J. Rodrigues, and M. Lopes,
Measurement of the absolute reflectance of polytetrafluoroethylene (ptfe) immersed in liquid xenon,
Journal of Instrumentation 12 (2017), no. 01 P01017.
[21] J. Haefner, A. Neff, M. Arthurs, E. Batista, D. Morton, M. Okunawo, K. Pushkin, A. Sander,
S. Stephenson, Y. Wang, et al., Reflectance dependence of polytetrafluoroethylene on thickness for
xenon scintillation light, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A:
Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment 856 (2017) 86–91.
[22] S. Kravitz, R. Smith, L. Hagaman, E. Bernard, D. McKinsey, L. Rudd, L. Tvrznikova, G. O. Gann,
and M. Sakai, Measurements of angle-resolved reflectivity of ptfe in liquid xenon with ibex, The
European Physical Journal C 80 (2020), no. 3 262.
[23] NEXT Collaboration and C. Adams and others, The NEXT-100 Detector, 2025.
[24] R. Budynas and J. Nisbet, Shigley’s Mechanical Engineering Design, Tenth Edition. McGraw-Hill
Education, 2015.
[25] NEXT Collaboration, L. Rogers et al., High voltage insulation and gas absorption of polymers in high
pressure argon and xenon gases, JINST 13 (2018), no. 10 P10002, [arXiv:1804.04116].
[26] J. Brydson, Plastics Materials, Seventh Edition. Butterworth-Heinemann, 1999.
[27] D. L. P. Macuvele, J. Nones, J. V. Matsinhe, M. M. Lima, C. Soares, M. A. Fiori, and H. G. Riella,
Advances in ultra high molecular weight polyethylene/hydroxyapatite composites for biomedical
applications: A brief review, Materials Science and Engineering: C 76 (2017) 1248–1262.
[28] R. Acciarri et al., The liquid argon in a testbeam (lariat) experiment, Journal of Instrumentation 15
(apr, 2020) P04026.
[29] P. Novella et al., Radiogenic backgrounds in the next double beta decay experiment, Journal of High
Energy Physics 2019 (oct, 2019).
[30] V. Álvarez et al., Radiopurity control in the next-100 double beta decay experiment: procedures and
initial measurements, Journal of Instrumentation 8 (Jan., 2013) T01002–T01002.
[31] N. Byrnes, I. Parmaksiz, C. Adams, J. Asaadi, J. Baeza-Rubio, K. Bailey, E. Church,
D. González-Díaz, A. Higley, B. Jones, et al., Next-crab-0: a high pressure gaseous xenon time
projection chamber with a direct vuv camera based readout, Journal of Instrumentation 18 (2023),
no. 08 P08006.
[32] B. Al Atoum, S. Biagi, D. González-Díaz, B. Jones, and A. McDonald, Electron transport in gaseous
detectors with a python-based monte carlo simulation code, Computer Physics Communications 254
(2020) 107357.
[33] L. Norman, K. Silva, B. Jones, et al., Dielectric strength of noble and quenched gases for high
pressure time projection chambers., Eur. Phys. J. C 82 (Jan, 2022) [arXiv:2107.07521].
[34] C. Adams, V. Álvarez, L. Arazi, I. Arnquist, C. Azevedo, K. Bailey, F. Ballester,

– 21 –

J. Benlloch-Rodríguez, F. I. Borges, N. Byrnes, et al., Sensitivity of a tonne-scale next detector for
neutrinoless double-beta decay searches, Journal of High Energy Physics 2021 (2021), no. 8 1–24.

– 22 –

